THEY MARCH 19, 20, 25
ELECTRONIC MEETING OF THE
OF TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION.
THIS MEETING IS BEING HELD
ELECTRONICALLY BUT WE INTEND TO
CONDUCT IT SIMILARLY TO AN
IN-PERSON MEETING.
PUBLIC COMMENT WILL BE VIA
TELEPHONE OR ONLY TO SPEAK
DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE
CALL TO ZERO SIX THREE THREE
SEVEN NINE SEVEN AND ENTER
MEETING AND NO NINE THREE FOUR
SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO NINE
ZERO SEVEN OR JOIN VIA THE ZOOM
LIKE THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLISHED
AGENDA AND THE PUBLIC NOTICES
SECTION OF THE CITY WEBSITE AND
ON THE BROADCAST OF THE MEETING
ON CTM.
>> CHRIS, IF YOU COULD PLEASE
CALL NOT A PROBLEM BEFORE WE
BEGIN I WANT TO ACKNOWLEDGE
THAT WE HAVE RECEIVED GRANTS
FROM COUNCIL MEMBER ACKMANN
COMMISSIONER HUTCHINSON, VICE
CHAIR LEWELLYN, COMMISSIONER
CONWAY WHO WILL UNFORTUNATELY
NOT BE ABLE TO ATTEND THIS
EVENING'S MEETING ON KOROL
PLEASE SAY HERE AND FROM WHERE
YOU'RE DIALING WHEN YOUR NAME
IS CALLED COMMISSIONER BRUTHEN
OF COMMISSIONER BRIAN
WE CAN'T
HEAR HIM AGAIN.
>> WE REGISTER YOUR PRESENCE.
I OK BUT NOT A PROBLEM.
COMMISSIONER OUTSWIM I CAME
HERE FROM ANN ARBOR
COMMISSIONER HOAK ER FROM ANN
ARBOR.
>> COMMISSIONER, YOU CAN PICK
UP SOME OTHER COMMISSIONER CULA
OR COMMISSIONER LEE HERE FROM
HONOLULU COMMISSIONER DOWN TO
COMMISSIONER CARPENTER HERE
UNFORTUNATELY NOT FROM HONOLULU
JUST SUPERIOR TOWNSHIP
COMMISSIONER ZECHER YOU'RE FROM
ANN ARBOR COMMISSIONER LIU HERE
FROM NY TOWNSHIP LIEUTENANT
MIKE SCHERBA.
OK COMMISSIONER MARGOLESE AND
COMMISSIONER STUKA ARE ALSO
ABSENT WITH THAT WE DO HAVE
QUORUM.
>> THANK THIS IS THIS IS
COMMISSIONER FLEW ALONG.
I WAS ABLE TO DIAL IN OH NO NOT
A PROBLEM.
I JUST MADE A RECORD OF THAT.
THANK YOU FOR ATTENDING US THIS
EVENING AND I BELIEVE THIS IS
RACHEL'S FIRST MEETING RIGHT.
IS THAT TRUE?
I JUST WANT TO WELCOME YOU.
WELCOME TO THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION.
WE'RE THRILLED TO HAVE YOU AND
LOOK FORWARD TO TO GETTING ALL
OF YOUR THOUGHTS AND QUESTIONS
ON ON EVERYTHING SO WELCOME AND
WE'RE FAIRLY INFORMAL.
WE TRY TO FOLLOW ROBERT RULES
BUT PLEASE FEEL FREE TO
INTERJECT ASK QUESTIONS
WHENEVER YOU FEEL NECESSARY.
ALL RIGHT.
SO YES, WE HAVE A QUORUM SO
LET'S FIRST MOVE ON TO THE
CONSUMER AGENDA.
THERE ARE TWO ITEMS ON
TONIGHT'S AGENDA APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA AND APPROVAL
OF THE MINUTES FOR THE FEBRUARY
MEETING.
ARE THERE ANY MODIFICATION TO
THE CONCEPT AGENDA SAYING NO
ONE CAN I HAVE A MOTION TO
APPROVE THE CONSENT AGENDA AS
PRESENTED BY ERIC SECONDED BY
MORGAN?
ALTHOUGH IN FAVOR PLEASE SAY
YES OR RAISE YOUR HAND.
>> YES, ALL THOSE OPPOSED
PLEASE SAY NO OR RAISE YOUR
HAND.
THE CONSENT AGENDA IS APPROVED
.
NEXT UP PUBLIC COMMENT.
THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES AGAIN PLEASE CALL TO
ZERO SIX THREE THREE SEVEN NINE
SEVEN TWO THREE AND ANSWER
MEETING I'D NUMBER NINE THREE
FOUR SIX THREE EIGHT FIVE TWO
NINE ZERO SEVEN FOUR CONNECT WE
ASSUME AS DESCRIBED ON THE
AGENDA CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
CALLERS THAT RAISE THEIR HAND
ONE BY ONE USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OR PHONE NUMBER OR THE
PERSON'S RESUME IN ORDER TO
ELECTRONICALLY RAISE YOUR HAND
TO INDICATE YOUR DESIRE TO
SPEAK PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON
YOUR PHONE OR THE RAISED HAND
BUTTON YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT THE HOST IS
ALLOWING YOU TO SPEAK WHEN
SPEAKING.
PLEASE MOVE TO A QUIET AREA AND
ANY TELEVISION OR BACKGROUND.
CHRIS, DO WE HAVE ANY MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC WHO WOULD LIKE TO
SPEAK?
>> I AM SEEING A FEW TIMES I
JUST A QUICK HANDS UP I WILL
GIVE YOU A 30 SECOND REMINDER
WHEN YOUR TIME'S ALMOST CONTRA
.
>> REMEMBER CATHY GRISWOLD, YOU
HAVE THE FLOOR
.
HELLO.
THIS IS CATHY GRISWOLD CALLING
FROM ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN.
I HAVE THREE QUICK ITEMS.
THE FIRST ONE IS EXTREMELY
SERIOUS.
IT IS REGARDING THE TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK THAT WAS PUT IN
THAT'S BEEN PLANNED ON LOWER
ROAD.
>> ARE YOU GETTING ARE ECHOING
FROM MY PHONE?
>> NO.
OK, GOOD.
I HAVE RAISED ISSUES WITH THE
TWO A CYCLE TRAFFIC IT IS NOT
RECOMMENDED GIVING ALL
OF CONFLICT POINTS ON NO ROAD.
IT IS NOT RECOMMENDED EVEN IF
YOU USE AN AID PACKAGE.
I HAVE ASKED STEYER TO RE
EVALUATE IT.
NOTHING HAS BEEN DONE.
I ASKED THAT IT BE PUT ON THE
AGENDA FOR TONIGHT THAT WASN'T
DONE AND I'M VERY SAD TO REPORT
THAT MY ONLY ALTERNATIVE AT
THIS POINT IS TO REPORT IT TO
THE STATE THROUGH LAURET
TOMORROW THAT THAT'S THE ONLY
WAY THAT IT CAN BE FLAGGED AND
WE HAVE TO REALIZE THAT WHILE
THIS IS IN THE NERVA CRASHES
NEGATIVELY IMPACT PEOPLE THAT
LIVE OUTSIDE THE CITY OF AMARA
BOTH AS VICTIMS AND ALSO AS
DRIVERS.
SO I'LL WAIT UNTIL NOON
TOMORROW IF ANYONE WANTS TO
CONTACT ME BUT DOUBLING DOWN IS
NOT A GOOD SOLUTION AND WE
REALLY NEED TO HAVE A
DISCUSSION AND EVALUATION BY A
RAPID ENGINEER.
NUMBER TWO CHAPTER FORTY
SECTION THREE TO FOUR TEAMS
WHICH REQUIRES CLEARING
VEGETATION IN OUR PUBLIC
WALKWAYS AS ALWAYS CORNERS TO
PROVIDE SAFE DISTANCE HAS BEEN
IGNORED BY THE CITY FOR A FEW
YEARS AND I'VE BEEN TOLD THAT
IT WAS GOING TO BE ROLLED INTO
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN.
HOWEVER, THE PEOPLE WORKING ON
THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN HAVE NO
KNOWLEDGE OF THAT.
SO I THINK THE TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSION MAY BE THE
APPROPRIATE PLACE TO LOOK AT
THAT.
SO AGAIN NEXT CHAPTER 40,
SECTION THREE THAT AUTHORITY.
LASTLY, I WOULD LIKE TO MENTION
TWO CRASHES THAT OCCURRED ON
FEBRUARY SIX.
THERE WAS A SERIOUS INJURY
CRASH AT GREEN IN BURBANK.
THAT'S AN AREA THAT'S BEEN
MONITORED AND IMPROVED OVER AT
LEAST THE LAST TWENTY YEARS AND
HAD BEEN A SCHOOL CROSSING WITH
WORK PLANNED ON NEXEN ROAD.
GREEN IS ONLY GOING TO GET THIS
YEAR.
SO THAT'S THE PROBLEM THE NEXT
CRASH WAS ON MARCH 11TH AND
POLICE ROAD THAT WAS A FATAL
CRASH.
A WOMAN WHO WAS OUT OF STATE.
SO I REALLY HOPE THAT THE
TRANSPORTATION COMMISSION TAKES
THE TIME TO AT LEAST LOOK AT
THIS SERIOUS INJURY AND FATAL
CRASHES THAT ARE OCCURRING IN
ANN ARBOR.
THANK YOU.
OK, I'M SEEING MOLLY CLIMBING
THE FLOOR.
IS YOURS
.
>> HI EVERYONE.
IT'S GOOD TO SEE YOU ALL HERE I
AM MOLLY KLEINMAN.
I AM A FORMER TRANSPORTATION
COMMISSIONER.
I LIVE IN WARD FOUR RIGHT NEAR
PACARD.
I'M CALLING OUT TO PLAN
SIDEWALKS THAT ARE COMING IN
RIGHT IN OUR NEIGHBORHOOD ONE
ON BROCKMANN AND ONE ON
CROSLAND.
THEY'RE PART OF THE SAME
PROJECT AND THERE HAVE BEEN A
HANDFUL OF REALLY LOUD REALLY
ANGRY PROPERTY OWNERS WHO'VE
BEEN TRYING TO STOP THESE
SIDEWALKS USING A VARIETY
OF EXCUSES.
THEIR MOST RECENT EXCUSE IS
TREES.
THEY SWITCHED TO TREES AFTER
COMPLAINING ABOUT THE SIDEWALK
PRIORITIZATION PROCESS DIDN'T
WORK.
I'M HERE TO SPEAK FOR THE
SIDEWALKS.
I'M HERE TO SAY THAT ESPECIALLY
BROCKMANN IS A ROUTE TO NOT ONE
NOT TWO BUT THREE SCHOOLS.
TAPAN PATTENGALE AND ST.
FRANCIS AND I REGULARLY SEE
KIDS WALKING IN THE STREET AND
THIS SECTION WHERE THERE ARE
MAJOR BURNS WHERE THERE'S
PARKING OF LARGE TRUCKS ON BOTH
SIDES IT'S EXTRAORDINARILY
DANGEROUS AND SIDEWALKS ARE
DESPERATELY NEEDED ON CROSLAND
I ACTUALLY WAS THE PETITIONER
FOR THE SIDEWALK ON LYNDY
PETITION WHEN MY OLDEST CHILD
STARTED AT PATTENGALE AND WE
STARTED HAVING TO WALK THROUGH
THAT SIDEWALK GAP EVERY DAY SHE
DOESN'T GO THERE ANYMORE BY THE
TIME THE SIDEWALK GOES AND
NEITHER OF MY KIDS WILL GO
THERE BUT I STILL BELIEVE THAT
IT IS AN INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
SIDEWALK.
IT'S AN INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT
ROUTE TO A SCHOOL.
I THINK THERE HAVE BEEN FEWER
COMPLAINTS ABOUT CROSSLIN BUT I
WANT TO MAKE SURE THAT BOTH
STREETS ARE INCLUDED IN THIS
PROJECT AND THAT THERE IS NO
FURTHER DELAY.
WE HAVE WAITED LONG ENOUGH FOR
THESE SIDEWALKS.
WE DON'T NEED ANY MORE STUDIES
OR EVALUATIONS.
WE NEED SIDEWALKS AND SAFE
ROADS TO SCHOOL.
THANK THANK YOU.
ALWAYS GOOD TO HEAR FROM YOU
MOLLY
.
>> I'M BEING AT DASHKOVA THE
FLOOR IS YOURS.
>> HI THIS IS ADAM JUSZKIEWICZ
CALLING FROM LAS VEGAS DRIVE IN
THE FOURTH WARD.
>> FIRST OF ALL I DON'T THINK
WE SHOULD BE USING AA TO MAKE
DECISIONS ABOUT WHETHER TO
INSTALL A CYCLE TRACK.
>> I'D ALSO LIKE TO MENTION
THAT WE'VE HAD YET ANOTHER
PEDESTRIAN KILLED BY TRAFFIC
VIOLENCE IN ANN ARBOR.
WE NEED TO LOOK FOR IMPROVEMENT
THAT CAN BE MADE ON PLIMOTH
BETWEEN GREEN AND US TWENTY
THREE WE NEED TO REDUCE SPEEDS,
REMOVE LANES AND ADD
CROSSWALKS.
>> I'D ALSO LIKE TO TALK AGAIN
TONIGHT ABOUT THE BRACKMAN AND
CRESTLINE SIDEWALK GAP FILLING
PROJECT.
THIS IS AN IMPORTANT WALKING
ROUTE TO THREE DIFFERENT
SCHOOLS.
TAPAN PATTENGALE AND ST.
FRANCIS.
AS SUCH IT IS IMPORTANT TO FILL
THE SIDEWALK GAP AND ARBITRATES
DESERVE THE CONNECTED, SAFE,
ACCESSIBLE AND DIRECT SIDEWALK
NETWORK THAT WE ARE PAYING FOR
THROUGH OUR PROPERTY TAXES.
I'M HAPPY THAT STAFF HAS FOUND
A WAY TO BUILD THESE SIDEWALKS
WITHIN THE PUBLIC RIGHT OF WAY
WHILE PRESERVING MOST IF NOT
ALL OF THE TREES AND TO THAT TO
ME SEEMS LIKE A WIN WIN THINGS
I HAVE HEARD SUGGESTED BY SOME
RESIDENTS INCLUDE DELAYING THIS
PROJECT UNTIL IT CAN BE DONE
SIMULTANEOUSLY WITH THE TRAFFIC
CALMING PROJECT.
THIS TRAFFIC CALMING PETITION
WAS SUBMITTED AFTER THE
SIDEWALK GAP CAME UP FOR
FILLING SO THE STREET IS AT THE
BOTTOM OF THE QUEUE.
THIS PROJECT ALREADY WILL NOT
BE STARTED UNTIL 2020 SIX AND
TYING IT TO A TRAFFIC CALMING
PROJECT THAT'S AT THE BOTTOM
OF THE QUEUE IS AN UNACCEPTABLE
DELAY.
I URGE THIS BODY AND STAFF TO
KEEP MOVING THE CURRENT PROJECT
AS IS TRAFFIC COMING CAN BE
DONE AFTER THE SIDEWALK IS
BUILT AND TRAFFIC COMING SHOULD
BE DONE.
I ALSO FIND IT INTERESTING THAT
THIS NEIGHBORHOOD REJECTED A
TRAFFIC CALMING PETITION A
NUMBER OF YEARS AGO AS SHOWN IN
DOCUMENTS OBTAINED UNDER THE
FREEDOM OF INFORMATION ACT
SETTING ASIDE NRA STANDARDS TO
BUILD SIDEWALKS THAT ARE LESS
THAN FIVE FEET WIDE, THIS WOULD
MAKE THE SIDEWALK LESS
ACCESSIBLE.
THE FACT THAT SUBSTANDARD
SIDEWALKS EXIST IS NO REASON TO
BUILD NEW SIDEWALKS THAT WAY WE
HAVE SIDEWALKS WITH STEPS ON
THEM.
WE WOULDN'T BUILD A NEW
SIDEWALK TWO STEPS IN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE.
THESE OLD SCHOOL SOLUTIONS HAVE
NO PLACE TODAY WE MUST BUILD
ACCESSIBLE SIDEWALKS REPLACING
SIDEWALKS AGAINST THE CURB.
THIS IS NOT SAFE OR ACCESSIBLE
SIDEWALKS NEEDED BUFFER
SEPARATING THEM FROM CARS.
THERE ARE A FEW PLACES IN TOWN
WHERE RIGHT OF WAY CONSTRAINTS
MAKE THIS NECESSARY BUT THAT'S
NOT THE CASE ON RACKMAN
SIDEWALKS SHOULD HAVE A TREE
LINE SEPARATING THEM FROM CARS
AND IT LOOKS LIKE THERE'S
PLENTY OF ROOM FOR THAT WITHIN
THE RIGHT OF WAY.
PLEASE ENSURE THESE SIDEWALKS
ARE BUILT WITHOUT FURTHER DELAY
AND BUILT TO THE FULL STANDARDS
OF OTHER ANN ARBOR SIDEWALKS.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU.
THANK OK.
I I'M BEING ERIC EVEN EVEN I
HOPE I'M NOT BUTCHERING YOUR
NAME THE FLOOR IS NOW YOURS.
>> I THANK YOU MY NAME EXCUSE
ME MY NAME IS ERIC ADVANTAGE
AND I'M CALLING IN FROM THE
THIRD WARD.
I WANT TO MAKE IT CLEAR THAT
ABSOLUTELY NO DELAY IS
ACCEPTABLE WITH RESPECT TO THE
BUILDING OF THE BROCKMAN'S
SIDEWALKS AND THE SIDEWALKS AS
WELL.
BROCKMANN IS A WALKING ROUTE TO
THREE SCHOOLS, THREE AREA
SCHOOLS PATTENGALE, ST. FRANCIS
AND HAPPEN AND OUR COMMUNITY
SCHOOLCHILDREN DESERVE SAFE
WALKING ROUTES TO AND FROM
SCHOOL THAT THE CONSTRUCTION
ISN'T SLATED TO OCCUR UNTIL
TWENTY TWENTY SIX IS ALREADY
MUCH TOO LONG TO WAIT FOR MORE
.
THE SIDEWALK SHOULD NOT BE UP
AGAINST THE STREET BUT THERE
SHOULD BE A CLEAR BUFFER
BETWEEN THE SIDEWALKS AND THE
STREETS.
I RECENTLY LEARNED WHY THE
STANDARD IS TO HAVE FIVE FOOT
WIDE SIDEWALKS AND THAT IS SO
TWO PEOPLE IN WHEELCHAIRS CAN
PASS EACH OTHER COMFORTABLY AND
LABOR HAS EMBRACED THE IDEA
OF ALL AGES AND ABILITIES FOR
OUR TRANSPORTATION NETWORK
INCLUDING OUR SIDEWALKS.
>> SOME OF THE PEOPLE WHO LIVE
ON BROCKMANN AND WHO ARE
ADVOCATING FOR DELAY SAY THEIR
STREET IS ONE OF THE MOST
BEAUTIFUL THE CITY I LIVE ON
TANNER BOULEVARD A STONE'S
THROW AWAY FROM ALLEN
ELEMENTARY AND I SEE KIDS AND
THEIR FAMILIES WALKING TO AND
FROM SCHOOL THROUGHOUT THE
SCHOOL YEAR SAFELY ON SIDEWALKS
.
>> I THINK THAT IS BEAUTIFUL.
IN ADDITION TO THE INHERENT
BEAUTY AND THE HUMANITY OF THE
SCENE, IT CLEARLY DEMONSTRATES
THAT WE AS A COMMUNITY CARE
ABOUT ONE ANOTHER AND WE MAKE
EFFORTS TO LOOK OUT FOR THE
WELL-BEING OF THE CHILDREN IN
OUR COMMUNITY.
>> SO NO DELAY ON THE BROKEN
SIDEWALKS OR THE SIDEWALKS AND
INCLUDE BUFFERS BETWEEN THE
SIDEWALKS AND THE STREET.
>> THANK YOU SO MUCH.
THANK YOU.
>> AT THIS TIME I'M NOT SEEING
ANY RACE TENTS.
I THINK IT'S A ALL RIGHT.
THANK YOU.
THANK YOU TO ALL MEMBERS OF THE
PUBLIC FOR COMING THIS EVENING
AND SPEAKING YOUR COMMENTS ARE
VALUABLE AND THANK YOU TO THOSE
WHO SEND EMAILS TO OUR
ATTENTION.
THERE WERE I BELIEVE 16 EMAIL
MESSAGES INCLUDED IN THE
PACKAGE.
SO THANK YOU FOR ALL OF THOSE
AS PLEASE TAKE A LOOK AT THOSE.
ALL RIGHT.
NEXT NEXT UP BUSINESS FOR THE
MONTH OF MARCH.
THERE IS NOT ANY BUSINESS ITEMS
FOR US TO BE VOTING ON TODAY SO
WE'LL MOVE ON
TO OUR
INFORMATION AND DISCUSSION
SECTION FIRST TOPIC THERE IS
MONTELENA STREET
RECONFIGURATION PROJECT UPDATE
WITH EVERBRIGHT IN THE CITY
ISSUED A REQUEST FOR PROPOSAL
FOR THIS PROJECT AND RECEIVED
PROPOSALS FROM THREE CONSULTANT
TEAMS STAFF REVIEWING THE
PROPOSALS AND IS PREPARING FOR
CITY COUNCIL APPROVAL ON A
CONTRACT WITH TOOL DESIGN GROUP
AND TREVER WILL IS HERE AND IS
GOING TO PROVIDE US A PROGRESS
UPDATE ON THE PROJECT.
SO TROVER I BELIEVE THE FLOOR
IS YOURS VERY MUCH BUT CAN
EVERYONE HEAR ME?
>> YEP.
ALL RIGHT.
I'M GOING TO SHARE MY SCREEN
AND IT SHOULD BE OK FOR PEOPLE
TO HAVE TO OR UP THE TOP THAT
WAY.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO I'M GOING TO GIVE YOU A BIT
OF A OF AN OVERVIEW OF THE
PROPOSED WORK FOR THE MULTILINE
RECONFIGURATION LIBRATION
PROJECT THAT IS GOING TO BE
KICKING OFF WHENEVER WE'RE ABLE
TO GET THE CONSULTANT UNDER
CONTRACT
.
>> SORRY.
OK, SO STARTING ON THE PURPOSE
OF THIS PROJECT IS TO EVALUATE
ALL CITY OWNED MULTIPLE-ENTRY
FOR POTENTIAL ROADWAY
RECONFIGURATIONS TO ADVANCE THE
MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS VISION
ZERO GOALS.
THIS INCLUDES SAFETY AND
LOWERING SPEED AND OR VEHICLE
SPEEDS, IMPROVING TRANSIT
OPERATIONS AND CREATING MORE
COMFORTABLE WALKING AND BIKING
ENVIRONMENTS.
>> WHY LOOK SO CLOSELY
EMOTIVELY?
ROADS IN ANN ARBOR THERE'S
THERE'S A BIG GENERAL REASON
AND I'M EXPRESSING THIS THROUGH
THIS TRILEMMA SPEED ACCESS AND
SAFETY.
YOU CAN ONLY PAEKTU IN GENERAL
IF YOU HAVE A ROAD WITH LOTS
OF SPEED AND YOU'RE GOING TO
MAKE IT SAFE, YOU NEED TO
SEPARATE ALL USERS IN TIME AND
SPACE AT MAKES FOR BROAD AND
LARGE FACILITIES FREEWAYS I
THINK RAILROADS, THINGS LIKE
THAT YOU CAN HAVE SPEED AND
SPEED AND ARE ACCESS AND SAFETY
GROUPS TOGETHER.
THAT'S THE THINGS THAT ARE VERY
TIGHT AND SMALL AND HAVE LOTS
OF MULTIMODAL ACCESS OR YOU CAN
MIX SPEED AND ACCESS TOGETHER
BUT YOU'RE GOING TO SACRIFICE
SAFETY.
THIS IS MORE SUBURBAN STYLE
HIGH SPEED COMMERCIAL
DEVELOPMENT WITH LOTS DRIVEWAYS
AND PURPOSE AND THINGS LIKE
THAT AS IS HAS LESS OF THAT
TYPE OF DEVELOPMENT THAN SOME
OTHER AREAS IN THE STATE.
BUT THAT'S WHY WE STILL HAVE WE
STILL HAVE SOME SOME OF THESE
WE HAVE TEN CORRIDORS THAT ARE
MULTILAYERED ROADWAYS THAT
ALLOW MORE THAN ONE LANE
OF TRAFFIC GOING GOING AT THE
SAME TIME THESE ARE ROADWAYS
THAT WE OBSERVED HIGHER CRASH
FREQUENCY SEVERITY.
THESE ARE ROADS THAT HAVE BEEN
IDENTIFIED AS NEEDING TO HAVE
SPEED MANAGEMENT TREATMENTS
PLACED ON AND THERE'S OTHER
BENEFICIAL USES THE RIGHT AWAY
THAT WE CAN DO WE CAN MAKE USE
OF SUCH AS RESERVING SPACE FOR
TRANSIT SERVICES, CREATING
SEPARATED NETWORKS, CYCLING
ROUTES AND PLACEMAKING HOW DOES
THIS FIT WITH SPEED MANAGEMENT
?
OUR SPEED MANAGEMENT
INITIATIVES ARE VARIOUS.
IT'S SOMETHING HAS BEEN
OF CONCERN TO TO OUR DEPARTMENT
AND TO THE COMMUNITY FOR QUITE
A WHILE.
AND SO LOOKING AT ALL THE WAYS
THAT WE TOUCH ON SPEED
MANAGEMENT FROM LOCAL TO A MORE
QUARTER LEVEL, YOU WE HAVE WE
LOOK AT FILE FILED TRAFFIC
COMPLAINT QUESTIONNAIRES TO TO
RECORD AND MAKE NOTES WHERE BAD
BEHAVIOR HAS BEEN TAKING PLACE
.
WE TAKE A LOOK.
WE HAVE A NEIGHBORHOOD TRAFFIC
COMING TO PETITION THAT HAS
BEEN PRETTY LONG STANDING
THAT'S ATTACHED TO A TRAFFIC
COMING PROGRAM THAT IS ANNUALLY
EXECUTED AND AND HAS A COUPLE
OF PROJECTS MOVE FORWARD EVERY
YEAR.
WE HAVE A SCHOOL TRAFFIC COMING
FULL TOOLKIT THAT IS BASED
AROUND SCHOOLS WHERE WE TAKE A
LOOK AT THE ROADS THAT ARE MOST
LIKELY TO BE USED BY USERS
OF THE SCHOOL FACILITY IN THE
LOCAL AREA AND AND THINK
THROUGH THE TYPES OF TREATMENTS
THAT WOULD MAKE THOSE ROUTES
SAFER.
>> WE HAVE CAPITAL PROJECTS IN
EVERY TYPE OF PROJECTS WE LOOK
AT MANAGEMENT AND TRY TO GET A
OUTCOMES AT THE END OF IT THAT
WILL PROVIDE SAFETY FOR ALL
USERS AND THAT'S USUALLY TACKED
UPON A UTILITY OR OTHER PAYMENT
PROJECT THAT IS ALREADY GOING
ON.
AND WE ALSO HAVE A TRAFFIC
SAFETY CORRIDOR PROGRAM WITH
POLICE.
>> THIS WAS MORE OF AN
ENFORCEMENT PROGRAM THAT IS
BASED AROUND OUR HIGHEST AREAS
OF OF OF SEVERITY FAMILIAR AS
WELL THESE WASHTENAW AROUND THE
URBAN LAND AREA WEST JACKSON
SQUARE STADIUM AREA AND THEN
I'M SORRY I'M MISSING THE THIRD
ONE I REMEMBER BUT ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT BECKER THANK YOU
VERY MUCH.
>> YES.
THANK YOU.
SO FINALLY WE HAVE THIS MAJOR
SCREEN SCREENING SCREENING
PROCESS THAT HAS BEEN DEVELOPED
THROUGH OUR THROUGH THE WORK UP
THE MOVING TOGETHER TOWARDS
VISION ZERO PLAN THAT SHOWS
VARIOUS STREETS THAT HAVE THAT
COULD BE AVAILABLE FOR TRAFFIC
COMING OUT.
BUT WE HAVE SOME NEGATIVE WE
HAVE WE HAVE A TOOLKIT BUT
THESE BASICALLY ACT AS INPUTS
TO OTHER OTHER CAPITAL PROJECTS
THAT WOULD BE GOING ON.
THERE'S NO SPECIFIC PROGRAM
LAID OUT TO REFORM THESE
STREETS AHEAD OF AHEAD OF THE
CAPITAL PROJECT.
I WANT TO JUST TAKE A LITTLE
SECOND TO TO DWELL ON THIS FOR
A SECOND BECAUSE THIS KIND
OF EXPLAINS SOME OF THE
APPROACH THAT WE'RE TAKING TO
THIS STUDY.
ARE YOU MAJOR STREET
IMPLEMENTATION HAS TO GENERAL
STEPHENS HERE THERE
TRANSPORTATION FEATURES ARE
INTEGRATED INTO ALL CITY WORK
LIKE THE CAPITAL PROJECTS.
SO EVERY TIME WE TOUCH A STREET
WE ARE LOOKING AT SPEED AND
CALLING SPEED ALSO
TRANSPORTATION FEATURES DO DO
NOT HAVE INTERNAL RESOURCES TO
LEAD A MAJOR PROJECT WORK OFTEN
AND SO WE FOLLOW ALONG CAPITAL
PROJECTS LIKE MILLER AVENUE AND
WHICH WE ARE OVERLAYING SPEED
MANAGEMENT ON TOP OF A CAPITAL
PROJECT.
AGAIN THIS IS LED BY UTILITIES
AND PAYMENT NEEDS.
WE HAVE DEVELOPMENT AGREED
AGREEMENTS WHEN A DEVELOPER
COMES IN WE TAKE A LOOK AT OUR
PLANS AND SEE WHAT WHAT IMPACTS
THAT WE HAVE AND HOW THAT CAN
HELP ADVANCE OUR PLANS.
SOME OF THESE HAVE PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT IMPACTS SO WE CAN
WE CAN WE CAN ASK FOR QUITE A
BIT BUT THEY DO HAVE LIMITED
GEOGRAPHIC REACH.
>> AND FINALLY THERE'S ALSO
GRANT FUNDING THAT WE PURSUE IN
THE FORM OF VARIOUS FEDERAL THE
LARGEST WHICH IS SAFE STREETS
FOR ALL GRANT FUNDING ADDS
ADDITIONAL OBLIGATIONS.
CHREBET, WHOEVER IS RELEASING
THE GRANT WILL HAVE CERTAIN
EXPECTATIONS FOR WHAT HAPPENED
WITH THEM THAT OFTEN SUITS MANY
OF OUR GOALS BUT IT ADDS
COMPLEXITY AND TIME AND AS
OF NOW THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
IS LESS AND LESS RELIABLE
PARTNER IN THESE TYPES OF GRANT
FUNDING ARRANGEMENTS IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE CITY COUNCIL
PASSED A RESOLUTION TO
ACCELERATE SAFETY IMPROVEMENTS
ON ALL LANE ROADS.
THIS REPORT REAFFIRMED
DIVISIONS AND H0 GOALS AND
INSTRUCTED US TO LOOK FOR
OPPORTUNITIES FOR LANE
REDUCTIONS IN CITY PROJECTS AT
ASKED US TO DEVELOP A PLAN FOR
EVALUATION OF ALL MULTILAYERED
CITY ROADS FOR RECONFIGURATION
AND TO PARTNER SPECIFICALLY
WITH TRANSIT AGENCIES TO MAKE
SURE THAT BUS OPERATIONS ARE
INTEGRATED FEATURES INTO THIS
EVALUATION OF PRIORITY ROUTES.
SO WE REALLY WANTED TO NOT JUST
TAKE SPACE AND NARROW IT AND
HAVE IT BE WORKED IN FOR OTHER
USES WHEN TRANSIT WILL HAVE A
IMPORTANT ROLE TO PLAY IN A
COUPLE OF YEARS WE NEEDED
NEEDED ADDITIONAL SERVICE ON
THE ON THOSE ROADWAYS THAT THE
THAT ARE EXPRESSED IN THEIR
PLANS WHEN WE LOOK AT THE
BUSINESS QUITE QUITE QUITE A
TASK.
>> AND SO WE TOOK A LOOK AT A
COUPLE OF POSSIBLE APPROACHES
PREVIOUSLY WE'VE WE LOOKED
THESE TYPES OF CHALLENGES AS
INDIVIDUAL STUDIES AND MAIN
STREET IS AN EXAMPLE IN WHICH
WE TAKE TAKE TAKE A LOOK AT
SPECIFIC ORDER.
WE STUDY IT.
WE HAVE PROJECT LEVEL
ENGAGEMENT AND WE DO DETAILED
ENGINEERING DESIGN AND THAT
HAPPENS QUARTER BY QUARTER,
PIECE BY PIECE, ONE AT A TIME.
SECOND APPROACH WE CONSIDERED
WHICH WAS MORE OF A TRAFFIC
CITY WIDE CITY CITYWIDE TRAFFIC
MODELING APPROACH BECAUSE WE
ARE LOOKING AT TEN CORRIDORS
THEY WILL HAVE INTERACTIONS
TOGETHER AND REARRANGING THESE
THE SPACE AND THEIR USE AND
FUNCTION ALL AT ONCE WILL WILL
CREATE SOME SPILLOVER EFFECTS
THAT THAT MODELING COULD HAVE
SOME WAY OF OF GIVING US SOME
INFORMATION ABOUT AND PERHAPS
MITIGATING SOME OF THOSE
EFFECTS NOW THAT MODELING IS
VERY DATA INTENSIVE AND TRAFFIC
MODELS TENDS TO BE NOT SO
SENSITIVE TO THINGS LIKE
TRANSIT WALKING AND CYCLING
WHICH ARE ALONG THE LINES
OF OUR GOALS FOR PROMOTION
OF WHAT WE DID EMBARK ON IS A
PLANNING LEVEL CORRIDOR
EVALUATION THE THE THE
ADVANTAGES FOR THIS APPROACH IS
THAT ALLOWS US TO EVALUATE ALL
THE MULTILAYERED CORRIDORS AT
ONCE.
IT WILL BE A LESS DETAILED
EVALUATION THAN THE CORRIDOR
SPECIFIC APPROACH AND IT WILL
BUT IT WILL ALLOW US TO SEARCH
FOR PRESENT DAY OPPORTUNITIES.
WE'LL BE COLLECTING DATA FROM
PRESENT DAY CIRCUMSTANCES AND
AND FUNDING TRYING TO PIECE
TOGETHER, ANALYZE AND TRY
TO
PIECE TOGETHER THE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR WHERE THERE
IS CURRENTLY SPACE THAT IS LESS
USED BY BY BY THE EXISTING
CIRCUMSTANCES.
AND WE'RE FOCUSING THE STUDY
ANALYSIS ON ESPECIALLY THE
INTERSECTING MULTILAYERED
CORRIDORS THAT ARE GOING TO
HAVE THE MORE COMPLEX
RELATIONSHIPS WE'RE TRYING TO
TRYING TO CUT DOWN THE MIDDLE
BETWEEN BETWEEN BEING TOO
SPECIFIC AND TOO GENERAL HERE
WE RELEASED AN RFP THE
INTRODUCTION VERY NICELY LAID
OUT A PROCESS FOR THIS THE THE
PROPOSAL THAT WE'RE SEEKING TO
AWARD WITH TOOL DESIGN, A
NATIONAL FIRM THAT DOES THESE
TYPES OF EVALUATIONS AND AND
RECONFIGURATIONS ACROSS THE US
AND THEY PROPOSE TO WORK PLAN
WITH FIVE ELEMENTS THAT
PLANNING FOR THIS FOR THIS
PROJECT.
>> THESE ELEMENTS ARE SAFETY.
THESE ARE FOCUSING ON THESE
HIGH SEVERITY ORDERS, WORKFORCE
MOBILITY.
THERE'S A LOT OF PEOPLE A
THOUSAND PEOPLE ABOUT THAT COME
IN TO ANN ARBOR EVERY DAY TO
WORK FOR EMPLOYMENT DURING THE
DAYTIME AND WE WOULD LIKE THEIR
TRAVEL TO BE SAFE AND RELIABLE
TRANSIT.
WE NEED TO LIKE I SAID,
DESIGNED SPACE FOR FUTURE
FEATURES, OUR CYCLING NETWORK,
OUR MULTILINE CORRIDORS ARE
OFTENTIMES THE MOST DIRECT
ROUTE TO GET PLACES THEY
CONNECT WITH OTHER CYCLING
CYCLING CORRIDORS AND SO BUT
THESE THESE MULTINATION
ROADWAYS OFTEN HAVE HIGH SPEEDS
,HIGH LEVEL OF STRESS AND AT
THE SAME TIME THEY'RE PROPOSED
PER FOR ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
BIKE ROUTES, MANY OF THEM ALSO
LOOKING AT TRAFFIC VOLUMES AND
WHERE LANE REDUCTIONS ARE
FEASIBLE ACCORDING TO ACCORDING
TO THE GUIDANCE AND WE'RE
LOOKING AT TRAFFIC VOLUMES LIKE
JUST SEEING THE MOST CHEKIST
HOUR OF THE EVERY DAY BUT ALSO
TRYING TO TAKE A LOOK AT THE
RANGE OF WHERE THOSE PEAKS ARE,
HOW LONG THEY LAST AND WHERE
THERE MAY BE MAYBE SPACE IN
THOSE IN THOSE PEAKS TO TRY TO
DO SOME SHIFTING TIME SHIFTING
OTHER THINGS LIKE THAT THAT CAN
HAVE SOME RELIEF ON THE DEMANDS
OF THE ROAD SYSTEM TO THE WE
ASKED THE CONSULTANT OR OUR
FUTURE CONSULTANT TO HELP US
DESIGN THIS METHOD SO MUCH WE
HAVE WE HAD AN IDEA ABOUT THE
GENERAL SIZE AND SHAPE OF IT TO
DESIGN PROPOSED STEERING CITY
GOALS TO SAFETY FOR SAFETY AND
VOTE SHIFT TO RECOGNIZE THE
BENEFITS AND TRADEOFFS THAT
HAPPEN WITH ANY REDESIGN THAT
TAKES PLACE SO WHY EYES WIDE
OPEN AT WHAT WE COULD GET OUT
OF IT AS WELL AS WHAT OF WHAT
WHAT WHAT DOWNSIDES WE MIGHT BE
MIGHT BE TRADING OFF SO THAT WE
MAKE AN EYES WIDE OPEN DECISION
ABOUT THINGS EACH CORRIDOR WILL
HAVE A COUPLE OF DIFFERENT
OPTIONS BASED ON MODE PRIORITY
AND OTHER TRADE OFFS TO TAKE A
LOOK AT AND AND AND WEIGH SO
OPTIONS AGAINST AND WE'LL BE
LOOKING AT SOME PROPOSED
METRICS LIKE PERSONAL
THROUGHPUT WHICH IS THE NUMBER
OF ABSOLUTE PEOPLE WHO CAN GET
THROUGH THAT.
IT DOESN'T PENALIZE TRANSIT FOR
FOR BEING ONE VEHICLE AND
COUNTING ONE ONE VEHICLE IN A
TRANSIT CIRCUMSTANCE CAN BE UP
TO 50 PEOPLE MORE THAN LIKELY
IT'LL BE A DOZEN OR SO OR
DEPENDING ON THE TIME OF DAY.
BUT IT ALSO INCLUDES ALL THE
PEOPLE WALKING AND ALL THE
PEOPLE BIKING AROUND THESE
CORRIDORS AS WELL.
WE'RE LOOKING AT THE ENTIRE
VOLUME CAPACITY LIKE I SAID,
NOT JUST TO TO TRY TO PRIVILEGE
THE MOTOR VEHICLES IN THERE BUT
ACTUALLY GETTING AN IDEA ABOUT
THE SIZE AND SHAPE OF THE PEAK
,OUR DEMANDS TO THINGS TO SEE
WHERE WE CAN RELIEVE SOME
STRESS AND AND BE ABLE TO HAVE
A WORKABLE SITUATION FOR
EVERYONE WHILE USING THAT SPACE
FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
I TAKE A LOOK AT THE TRASH
REDUCTION THAT'S ANTICIPATED
THE CRASH MODIFICATION FACTORS
FOR THE INTERVENTIONS AS WELL
THE PEDAL CYCLE DIFFERENCE IN
THE LEVEL OF STRESS AND ANY
TRANSIT SERVICE THAT CAN BE
CONCEPTUALLY DESIGNED WITH THIS
THE THE PROPOSED GROUPING,
THESE CORRIDORS, THESE TEN
CORRIDORS TOGETHER INTO INTO A
COUPLE OF CATEGORIES TO HELP US
DEFINE OUR FOCUS.
>> SOME OF THEM ARE GOING TO BE
DEFINED AS OPPORTUNITY
CORRIDORS.
THESE ARE THE ONES WITH THE
LEAST COMPLICATIONS TO THEM AND
SO TAKING TAKING A HIGHER LEVEL
LOOK AT THOSE AND HAVING MORE
TYPICAL CROSS SECTIONS AND
THINGS LIKE THAT COME OUT
RATHER THAN DETAILED MORE
DETAILED DESIGNS.
THERE'S GOING TO BE SOME
CHALLENGING CORRIDORS TO BE
HIGHER PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC
VOLUMES AND CAPACITY
CONSTRAINTS, KEY INTERSECTIONS,
A RUNWAY CONFIGURATION THAT
REDUCES TRAVELING'S COULD
RESULT IN TRAFFIC DIVERSION ON
OTHER MAJOR ROUTES OR INTO INTO
MORE LOCAL STREETS.
THESE SEGMENTS MIGHT REQUIRE
SOME ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATION
FOR HOW TO MITIGATE THAT THAT
VERY, VERY PEAK HOUR TRAFFIC TO
HELP REDUCE SOME OF SOME
OF THESE SOME OF THESE TRADE
OFFS.
THESE WILL NEED TO TAKE TO BE
TAKING A CLOSER LOOK AND WILL
BE THE EMPHASIS OF OUR OF OUR
DATA COLLECTION AND ANALYSIS
AND THEN FINALLY THE TRANSIT
CORRIDORS WITH HIGH PRIORITY
WITH PRIORITY FOR HIGH LEVEL
TRANSIT INFRASTRUCTURE THAT CAN
BE ACHIEVED WITH TRAVEL LANE
REASSIGNMENT.
THESE ARE KIND OF LIKE THE ONES
THAT ARE GOING TO BE A LITTLE
BIT DIFFERENT BECAUSE WE KNOW
THAT IS GOING TO BE THE
PRIORITY ON THOSE ON THOSE
CORRIDORS ALREADY WE'RE LOOKING
AT SOME FINAL DELIVERABLES.
WHERE WILL THIS GET US?
WELL, AND THIS DOESN'T GET US
ALL THE WAY DOWN TO WHERE THE
SINGLE STUDY COURSES WOULD GET
US ALL THE WAY DOWN TO SOME
ENGINEERING DESIGN IN WHICH WE
CAN GO OUT AND BUILD IT WILL
GIVE US MORE CONCEPTUAL DESIGNS
ACROSS THESE TEN CORRIDORS.
THEY'LL GET TYPICAL CROSS
SECTIONS, SOME MORE ANALYSIS
FOR ALTERNATIVE OPTIONS FOR
COUNTING CALORIES AND MORE
ATTENTION TO TRANSIT STOP AND
PEDESTRIAN ACCESS FOR TRANSIT
CORRIDORS AND WE'LL GET SOME
PLANNING LEVEL COST ESTIMATES
SO THAT WE HAVE A GOOD IDEA ON
ALL OF THESE CORRIDORS WHEN
THERE IS INTEREST IN ADVANCING
A PROJECT TOWARDS DESIGN AND
CONSTRUCTION THAT WE HAVE AN
IDEA ABOUT WHAT THE PRIORITY
IS, SOME OF THE KEY
INTERVENTIONS THAT WE'LL NEED
TO TAKE PLACE IN ORDER TO IN
ORDER TO REALIZE THE CONCEPT.
ONE LAST SLIDE ABOUT THE
TIMELINE WE ARE GOING TO
COUNSEL FOR COUNCIL APRIL SEVEN
IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE THIS
PROJECT HAS PROPOSED ONE YEAR
OF WORK APPROXIMATELY SPRING
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE TO SPRING
TWENTY TWENTY SIX THE BASIC
FLOW OF THE STUDY WILL BE DATA
COLLECTION AT FIRST AND THE
SUMMER WILL BE LOOKING AT
ADVANCING SOME ANALYSIS METHOD
PERFORMING ANALYSIS METHODS AND
CONDUCTING ANALYSIS SUMMER TO
WINTER.
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE WILL BE
DEVELOPING CONCEPTS AND REALLY
STARTING TO WORK PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT AND TO GET MORE
REACTIONS ONCE THERE ARE SOME
THINGS TO SEE.
AND THEN FINALLY IN THE WINTER
SPRING TWENTY TWENTY SIX
FINALIZING THESE CONCEPTS AND
PRODUCING THE REPORTS SO THAT
WAS DESIRED BECAUSE THIS IS
KIND OF LIKE SOMEWHAT OF AN
ABSTRACT STUDY SOMEWHAT TO THE
HEART OF OUR GOALS AND VALUES
HERE BUT STILL A BIT OF A IT
ISN'T QUITE THE WORD BUT THIS
ISN'T A TYPICAL STUDY OF THESE
TYPES OF THINGS.
AND SO I WANT TO I WANTED TO
GIVE THIS COMMISSION A OVERVIEW
OF WHAT THIS WILL BE SO YOU'RE
AWARE OF IT AND OUR MOTIVATIONS
BEHIND IT AND THE REASON FOR
THE APPROACH THAT WE'RE TAKING
FOR THIS I MY CONTACT
INFORMATION THAT ENDS MY
PREPARED REMARKS FOR THIS CHAIR
IF I'M HERE TO TAKE ANY
QUESTIONS AS FAR AS THE
COMMISSION HAS THEM ASHARA
QUESTIONS FROM ANYONE COMMENTS
I'LL KICK IT OFF.
I ASSUME THAT OF THE THE TEN
CORRIDORS THAT ARE GOING TO BE
INCLUDED IN THE IN THE STUDY
ARE THEY LOOKING AT SEGMENTS
OF EACH CORRIDOR OR ARE THEY
TREATING EACH CORRIDOR IN ITS
ENTIRETY AS A CANDIDATE
CANDIDATE FOR EXAMPLE?
ARE THEY JUST WILL THEY HAVE
THE CAPACITY TO SAY MAYBE THE
ENTIRE CORRIDOR WILL BE ABLE TO
HANDLE IT BUT THIS SEGMENT
OF IT COULD?
I GUESS MY RESPONSE IS THIS IS
A BROAD YES.
WE'VE BROKEN THEM OUT INTO TEN
CORRIDORS BECAUSE THAT'S EASY
GEOGRAPHICALLY AND TO END WHAT
TO DO ALONG THESE CORRIDORS
THERE IS SOME DIVERSITY
OF CIRCUMSTANCE AND SO THERE
COULD BE AREAS IN WHICH THERE
ARE SOME EASY THINGS TO DO AND
SOME AREAS WHERE THERE ARE SOME
OTHER THINGS TO DO.
I SUSPECT THAT THAT THE
CONCEPTS WILL BE RESPONSIVE TO
THAT AND BECAUSE REALLY WE'RE
TRYING TO WE'RE TRYING TO
IDENTIFY THE HARD AREAS TO BE
ABLE TO PUT MORE ATTENTION TO
AND LEAVE THE EASY AREAS OUT.
SO IF THERE IS A SECTION OF A
LONGER CORRIDOR IN THERE THAT
IS IS ESPECIALLY EASY IN WHAT
IS ESPECIALLY HARD, I CAN I CAN
SEE US MAKING THAT DECISION.
BUT IN GENERAL IT IS TRYING TO
GET US TO THE POINT WHERE WE
HAVE A GOOD SOLID IDEA ABOUT
WHAT MOST OF THE CORRIDOR
LAYOUT COULD BE AND IF THERE
ARE CHALLENGING POINTS TO DIG
IN AND TRY TO RESOLVE SOME
OF SOME OF THE SOME OF THE
ISSUES AND THE MORE COMPLICATED
POINTS AND PUT THE BULK OF OUR
ENERGY AND ATTENTION INTO AND
TO TRYING TO THINK THROUGH SOME
OF THE HARD PROBLEMS THERE.
PETE, THANKS FOR THAT
PRESENTATION.
TREVOR.
HOW HARD WOULD IT BE TO ADD
NORTHMAN JACKSON IN WASHINGTON
HERE ON AT THIS POINT CAN WE
GOT YOU NOT ONE WASHINGTON
DRAWN ARE ALL STATE TRUNK LINES
AND THOSE WERE IN INTENTIONALLY
NOT INCLUDED IN THIS STUDY DUE
TO THEM BEING STATE OWNED TRUNK
LINES AND NOT WANTING TO DIG
INTO FAR ON A ROAD THAT THE
CITY CAN TAKE NO IMMEDIATE
ACTION ON SHOULD BE SHOULD
SHOULD WE WANT TO DO PLUS THEY
ARE WRAPPED INTO ONGOING
STUDIES NEGOTIATIONS WITH EMDEN
OR JURISDICTIONAL TRANSFER PLUS
THE US WE HAVE NORTHMEAD STUDY
ALREADY UP.
IT'S NOT UP AND RUNNING WITH IT
.
WE HAVE A PROPOSAL RFP OUT FOR
A NORTHMEAD STUDY IN PARTICULAR
THAT WILL BE HANDLED SEPARATELY
AND THE WASHTENAW CORRIDOR IS
THE RIDES TOP PRIORITY FOR
TRANSIT SERVICE AND WE ARE HAVE
BEEN IN CONVERSATION WITH THE
RIDE AND KNOWING THE TRANSIT
SERVICE IS THE TOP PRIORITY FOR
IT FOR THAT QUARTER FOR US AS
WELL WANTING TO PARTNER WITH
THE RIDE WHATEVER ADVANCING
STUDY THAT MAY COME OUT
ADVANCED BUS RAPID TRANSIT ON
THAT WASHINGTON CORRIDOR SO THE
STATE ROADS WHERE WERE SET
ASIDE FOR THIS CASE LEAVING IT
TO THE OTHER MULTIPLE CITY
ROADS TO BE THE FOCUS OF THE
STUDY.
OK, I GUESS I'D LIKE TO OFFER
TRINITY'S PERSPECTIVE THAT OK,
THAT THE RESULTS OF THIS STUDY
MIGHT INFORM OUR DECISION ABOUT
HOW BADLY WE WANT THOSE TRUNK
LANES IF THE STUDY SHOWS THAT
WE COULD THAT IF WE HAD CONTROL
WE COULD MAKE REALLY GOOD
IMPROVEMENTS IN
RECONFIGURATIONS THE TRUNK
LINES THEN WE MIGHT REALLY WANT
TO GO AFTER IT.
SO THAT'S JUST MY PERSPECTIVE
AND WANTED TO SHARE.
>> THANK YOU.
THANK YOU THAT THANKS RACHEL.
>> YEAH THANKS A LOT FOR THAT
PRESENTATION TREVOR.
ONE BASIC QUESTION IS WOULD
WILL THIS NOT BE AVAILABLE IN A
SLIGHTLY MORE GRANULAR FORM FOR
US TO TAKE A LOOK AT LATER ON
AND YEAH YEAH WE WE HAVEN'T WE
DIDN'T PRODUCE ANY MAPS
OF OURSELVES.
THE PROPOSALS CAME WITH A
COUPLE OF MAPS.
THIS IS A TOOL.
IT IS SCRUNCHED IN AND THINGS
LIKE THAT DURING THE STUDY
THERE WILL BE BETTER MAPS
AVAILABLE.
I CAN GET YOU A LIST OF OF
OF ABOUT ALL OF YEAH EVEN JUST
THE LIST WOULD BE GREAT.
>> YEAH FOR SURE.
AND THEN A COUPLE MORE
SUBSTANTIVE I'D LOVE TO HEAR A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT ANY
PUBLIC ENGAGEMENT METHODS THAT
YOUR PLANNING THAT MAY BE
DIFFERENT FROM PUBLIC
ENGAGEMENT THAT'S BEEN DONE ON
TRANSPORTATION STUDIES IN THE
PAST OR IF THEY'RE ALL THE SAME
THAT'S THAT'S REALLY FINE TOO.
I ALSO YOU KNOW IT'S LIKE YOU
KNOW WE HAVE SOME PLANS OR
ASPIRATIONS THAT THE CITY HAS
ALREADY EXPRESSED THAT ALIGN
WITH THIS.
YOU TALKED ABOUT THAT IN THE
BEGINNING YOUR PRESENTATION I
GUESS I JUST LOVE TO HEAR YOU
SAY A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
YOUR EXPECTATIONS FOR HOW THE
ASSESSMENT MIGHT KIND OF ALIGN
WITH THOSE PLANS OR POSSIBLY
CONFLICT IF YOU COULD GIVE A
FEW MORE DETAILS AND MAYBE
THEIR SPECIFIC ORDERS WHERE
YOU'RE LIKE YEAH, WE DEFINITELY
NEED MORE DATA OR OTHER ONES
WHERE YOU'RE LIKE WE KNOW IT'S
PROBABLY GOING TO CONFIRM YOU
WHAT WE ALREADY THINK IS GOING
TO BE USEFUL HERE AND ON THE
SAME LINES IT WOULD BE HELPFUL
FOR THE TRAFFIC DIVERSION.
SO JUST LIKE MAYBE HAVE AN
EXAMPLE OR A COUPLE MORE
DETAILS ON LIKE EXACTLY WHAT
YOU'RE ALREADY WORRIED ABOUT OR
IF YOU DON'T IF YOU DEFINITELY
DON'T WON'T KNOW UNTIL YOU GET
THE DATA THAT'S OK TOO.
BUT IF YOU HAVE SOME IDEAS
ALREADY THAT YOU CAN THAT BE
HELPFUL.
>> SO OF QUITE A MULTIPART
QUESTION I WENT THROUGH YOU
THREE I WILL NOT REALLY JUST
ALL ENDEAVOR TO ANSWER THOSE
AND YOU CAN REMIND ME OF WHAT
I'VE MISSED.
OK, SURE.
SO FAR PREJUDGMENT ARE WE WE
HAVEN'T ENGAGEMENT TOOL BOX WE
STANDARD THAT WE USE THAT IS I
I'M GOING TO MESS UP THE
INITIALIZATION BUT AN
INTERNATIONAL RECOGNIZED
STANDARD THAT TRIES TO MATCH
THE QUESTIONS THAT WE'RE
SEEKING FROM THE COMMUNITY TO
THE ENGAGEMENT THAT WE'RE DOING
SO WITH THIS THIS IS THIS IS
EXPRESSED KIND OF LIKE WE ARE
WE THE COMMUNITY HAS ALREADY
EXPRESSED AN INTEREST IN SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND REDUCTIONS AND
IN MANY AREAS AND SO WE ARE
GOING TO BE DOING MORE WEBSITE
SET UP AND POP UP EVENT TYPE
AWARENESS STUFF AT THE
BEGINNING PHASE ONCE WE GET
DOWN INTO THE SUMMER WEATHER
AND HAVE CONCEPTS, WE'LL BE
DOING MORE OPEN HOUSES AND
SURVEYS AND EVENTS THAT ARE
MORE BROADLY BASED SEEK THAT
TYPE INPUT ABOUT WHAT PEOPLE
THINK ABOUT DIFFERENT CONCEPT
DESIGNS AND AREAS THAT WE MIGHT
WE MIGHT HAVE MISSED.
SO IT'LL BE IT'LL BE PRETTY
SIMILAR TO OTHER ENGAGEMENTS
THAT WE'VE DONE IN THE PAST
BOTH IN THE CITY OR THE DDA
PROBABLY A LITTLE BIT SCALED
UP, MUCH MORE SCALED DOWN THAN
WHEN THE DOWNTOWN MEETINGS WERE
FOR THE DOMINANT RECIRCULATION
CUTTING COMPREHENSIVE PLAN JUST
BECAUSE THIS IS A BIT OF A
SMALLER OPERATION HERE.
BUT WE DEFINITELY ARE LEARNING
LESSONS FROM THE VARIOUS
ENGAGEMENTS WE'VE HAD OVER THE
PAST COUPLE OF YEARS OF THAT
STYLE THE DIVERSION FACTOR, THE
DIVERSION FACTOR IS SOMETHING
THAT WE KNOW WILL HAPPEN
ESPECIALLY WHEN UPON FIRST
IMPLEMENTATION PEOPLE'S
PATTERNS WILL CHANGE, THEY'LL
CHANGE IN TIME THE CHANGE AND
ROUTE AND AND WE WILL SEE
VARIOUS VARIOUS VARIOUS THINGS
UNTIL UNTIL WE HIT AT A
DIFFERENT EQUILIBRIUM IF WE ARE
CREATING IF WE CHOOSE OR
HAPPENED TO CREATE A
CIRCUMSTANCE IN WHICH THERE IS
LOTS OF QUEUING AND BACK UP AND
SIDE STREETS ARE AVAILABLE TO
CUT THROUGH TO TO ANOTHER
PLACE, WE KNOW THAT PEOPLE WILL
AVAIL THEMSELVES OF THE THERE
ARE THERE THERE ARE PLACES
THROUGHOUT THAT AROUND THE
CITY, SOME OF THEM WHICH I
COULD ONLY SPECULATE AND I KNOW
AND OTHERS OF WHICH WE I WON'T
KNOW UNTIL POINTED OUT TO ME
NECESSARILY BUT I THAT WILL BE
SOMETHING THAT WE ARE GOING TO
BE SCANNING AND LOOKING FOR AND
THINKING ABOUT HOW HOW HOW
CRITICAL THAT FACTOR IS KIND
OF LIKE MORE OF A VALUE
JUDGMENT.
HOW MUCH DO YOU WANT SLOWER
SPEEDS AND TRAFFIC FUNNELED
INTO A FEW CORRIDORS VERSUS
TRAFFIC HIGHER SPEED AND
CHANNELED INTO A FEW MAJOR
CORRIDORS VERSUS ONES THAT
DURING PEAK HOUR IT COULD
BECOME OVERSATURATED AND SEEK
ALTERNATE ROUTES THROUGH THE
CITY.
AND WHAT IS THE BEHAVIOR LIKE
OF PEOPLE THAT ARE CHOOSING BUS
ROUTES OR THE TREATING THE
ALTERNATE ROUTES WITH RESPECT
TO OR THEY SHIFTING DANGEROUS
BEHAVIOR TO OTHER AREAS?
AND I'M NOT I'M NOT SURE WE
KNOW THE ANSWER TO THAT QUITE
YET.
AND WHEN YOU'RE ON ME, THE
THIRD PART A QUESTION I THINK I
THINK I SKIPPED OVER THE MIDDLE
PORTION.
>> YEAH.
NO THANKS.
AND THAT WAS SUPER HELPFUL.
I THINK THE LAST QUESTION WAS
ABOUT WHETHER ANY PLANNED
PROJECTS THAT ALIGN WITH THE
NATURE OF THE ASSESSMENT IF YOU
HAVE ANY EXPECTATIONS FOR WAYS
IN WHICH THE THE ASSESSMENT
MIGHT ALIGN WITH PROJECTS THAT
ARE ALREADY PLANNED VERSUS
WHERE YOU'RE LIKE WE DEFINITELY
NEED MORE DATA BECAUSE WE THINK
WE HAVE A CONFLICTING FINDING
YOCHIM I THINK WE'RE GOING TO
WANT TO COLLECT SOME PRETTY
COMPREHENSIVE DATA ON THESE TO
BE ABLE TO COMPARE APPLES TO
APPLES.
BUT THERE ARE OTHER PROJECTS
THERE.
THERE'S A SENSE IN WHICH THE
THE THE MULTI LANE ROAD
EVALUATION WAS GOING TO OR IS
DOVETAILING WITH THESE SAME
STREETS FOR ALL SPEED
MANAGEMENT AND AND BUILD
OF PROGRESSION PRETTY WELL
BEING ATTACHED TO A TO A
FEDERAL GRANT FOR THAT WORK
THERE IS A THERE IS A NEED TO
GET THROUGH THE ENVIRONMENTAL
PROCESS IN A WAY THAT MAKES THE
TOUCHES THAT WE'RE DOING TO
THAT WORK A LITTLE BIT LIGHTER
AND THE ROADS THAT ARE BEING
PURSUED MORE OF THAT OF THE TWO
LANE ONE LANE IN EACH DIRECTION
STYLE AND SO IF YOU WERE TO
OVERLAY THE MAP WITH THE ONES
WE'RE STUDYING WITH THE MAP
OF THE POTENTIAL CAPITAL
INTERVENTIONS, IT CREATES A
PRETTY COMPREHENSIVE PICTURE
OF MOST OF THE ROADS IN THE
CITY THAT ARE THROUGH THAT.
ARE THESE LIKE MAJOR THREE ROAD
TYPE TYPE TYPE ROADS AND SO
THEN THAT'S AND THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE'RE GOING TO
BE BACK AND FORTH AND COMMUTE
INTERCOMMUNICATION WITH.
AND I THINK THE OTHER WAY THAT
THIS ATTACHES HERE DOES THE
TRUNK LINES ARE ALWAYS ON OUR
MINDS AS WELL AND WANTING TO
HAVE THE SAME PHILOSOPHY AND
APPROACH AND KNOWLEDGE AND
EXPERIENCE THAT WE GAIN FROM
THIS FROM THIS TYPE
OF EVALUATION AND THESE
COMMUNITY CONVERSATIONS TO BE
ABLE TO GAIN MOMENTUM AND AND
INFORM THINGS LIKE BUS RAPID
TRANSIT ON WASHTENAW WHICH IS A
ALL OF THESE PROJECTS HERE
WOULD BE WOULD BE COMMUNITY
TRANSFORMATIVE BUT THE THE
WASHINGTON BUS RAPID TRANSIT
WOULD BE A COUNTY
TRANSFORMATIVE.
IT'S TO A WHOLE NOTHER SCALE
OF OF THE OTHER VALUE THAT IT
COULD BRING.
THANKS.
SOUNDS LIKE YOU HAVE LOTS
OF PLANS FOR THE DATA BEYOND
JUST FIGURING OUT WHAT MIGHT BE
THE BEST CONCEPT.
>> SO I APPRECIATE THAT.
>> THANK YOU.
OTHER QUESTIONS OR COMMENTS OR
I WANT TO THANK YOU AGAIN
DRIVER FOR COMING COMING BY AND
PRESENTING THIS TO US.
I PERSONALLY VERY MUCH LOOK
FORWARD TO COUNCILOR APPROVING
THIS CONTRACT AND THEN STARTING
TO TO SEE THE ENGAGEMENT
SESSIONS AND AND SEE WHAT
DESIGNS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
COME OUT OF MIXTURE.
>> THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU FOR YOUR TIME ALL
RIGHT.
WE'RE GOING TO NEXT TOPIC FIFTH
AVENUE BETWEEN MADISON AND
WILLIAM PROJECT AND DESIGNING
FOR ALL AGES AND ABILITIES.
THERE ARE MULTIPLE CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS ALONG FIFTH AVENUE
THIS YEAR INCLUDING UNDERGROUND
UTILITIES AND PAVEMENT
RESURFACING.
SO CYNTHIA IS HERE TO PROVIDE
AN UPDATE ON THE ONGOING WORK
AND EXPLORING ALTERNATIVE CROSS
SECTION DESIGNS.
SO CYNTHIA, WHAT IS YOURS?
>> SIR, I MY FIRST POINT IS
GOING TO BE A LITTLE BIT OF A
CLARIFICATION I'M ACTUALLY
GOING TO WALK THROUGH ARE ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES BICYCLE
NETWORK AND AND DESIGN
SELECTIONS AND HOW THAT WORKS.
AND THEN I WILL TALK A LITTLE
BIT ABOUT SOME STUFF THAT'S
GOING ON WITH AVENUE.
>> I'M GOING TO GO AHEAD SHARE
POWERPOINT WHICH YOU WILL
NOTICE HAS SOME STRIKING
SIMILARITIES YOU HAVE FIRST
BECAUSE WE HAVE A STANDARD THAT
WE USED TO RATE ME AND AS I
SAID, THIS IS MY INTRODUCTORY
SLIDE.
THAT'S WHY I'M GOING TO BE
TALKING ABOUT ARE ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES BICYCLE NETWORK AND
AN OVERVIEW AND THEN HAVE A
DESIGN EXAMPLE.
MY NAME IS CYNTHIA RENNINGER.
I AM ONE OF THE TRANSPORTATION
ENGINEERS AND OUR DEPARTMENT.
>> WE RECOGNIZE THAT WE DO HAVE
SOME COMMISSIONERS WHO HAVE
JOINED SINCE WE FIRST HAVE LAST
PRESENTED ABOUT THIS TOPIC.
SO WE WANTED TO JUST GIVE AN
OVERVIEW AND BRING EVERYONE UP
TO SPEED.
I'M GOING TO APOLOGIZE.
I AM COMING DOWN THE CODE .
I DO HAVE A PASSENGER IN MY
MOUTH SO IF I AM DIFFICULT
UNDERSTAND PLEASE LET ME KNOW
AND I WILL SPIT IT OUT BUT I'M
GOING TO GO AHEAD AND MOVE
FORWARD.
>> SO OUR FIRST SLIDE NEEDS
MOBILITY GOALS AND VALUES AND
THE SLIDE HAS ALL OF THE MAJOR
GOALS AND VALUES FROM OUR
TRANSPORTATION PLAN ALONG WITH
THE LITTLE ICONS THAT ACCOMPANY
THOSE IN THE TRANSPORTATION
PLAN.
IF YOU HAPPEN TO BE CRUISING IT
THOSE ARE SAFETY WHICH IS IN
OUR AS A SAFE CITY WHERE
EVERYONE PARTICIPATES IN
CREATING AN ENVIRONMENT IN
WHICH PEOPLE FEEL CONFIDENT AND
COMFORTABLE TRAVELING MOBILITY
AND OUR PRIORITIZES MOVING
PEOPLE AND GOODS EFFICIENTLY
AND MAKING IT EASIER FOR PEOPLE
TO CHOOSE SUSTAINABLE MODES
OF TRANSPORTATION ACCESSIBILITY
FOR ALL IN ANN ARBOR PEOPLE
OF ALL AGES AND ABILITIES AND
STAGES OF LIFE INCOME RACES,
CULTURES AND ETHNICITIES HAVE
EQUITABLE ACCESS TO THE PLACES
WHERE THEY LIVE, WORK AND PLAY
AND HEALTHY PLACES AND
SUSTAINABLE HEALTHY PEOPLE AND
SUSTAINABLE PLACES AND
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM SUPPORTS
HEALTHY POPULATIONS,
SUSTAINABLE ENVIRONMENT AND
ROBUST ECONOMY WHILE
CELEBRATING ENHANCING A UNIQUE
QUALITY IN REGIONAL
CONNECTIVITY SO OUR WORKS TO
EXPAND TRAVEL OPTIONS
THROUGHOUT THE REGION AND
INTEGRATE ITS TRANSPORTATION
SYSTEM INTO WIDER REGIONAL
NETWORKS.
>> AND I JUST I BRING UP
BECAUSE I THINK IT'S ALWAYS
IMPORTANT FOR US TO REFLECT ON
THOSE MOBILITY GOALS AND VALUES
AS WE ARE LOOKING AT HOW WE
CONDUCT OUR BUSINESS.
>> THIS NEXT SLIDE INCLUDES THE
TWENTY TWO KEY MOBILITY
STRATEGIES.
LARRY, PLEASE FORGIVE ME.
I AM GOING TO NOT READ THROUGH
ALL OF THESE BUT I WANT TO
FOCUS ON NUMBER SIX WHICH IS A
KEY MOBILITY STRATEGY THAT WE
ARE TARGETING IS TO BUILD OUT A
SAFE COMFORTABLE NETWORK
OF BIKE ROUTES FOR PEOPLE
OF ALL AGES AND ABILITIES.
ALL RIGHT.
OUR NEXT SLIDE ADDRESSES
STRATEGY SIX WHICH IS WHICH ARE
BIKE ROUTES AND IT READS THAT
OUR TIMELINE IS TO BE SHORT
ZERO TO THREE YEARS THAT WE
SHOULD BE STARTING TO WORK ON
THIS.
>> THE LEAD AGENCY FOR THE PLAN
IS ENGINEERING AND
TRANSPORTATION ARE ACTIVE
TARGETS FOR THE NETWORK ARE TO
INSTALL FIVE MILES OF NEW AND
UPGRADED ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
ROUTES EACH YEAR AND COMPLETE
THE ALL AGES AND ABILITIES
BICYCLE NETWORK BY TWENTY
THIRTY FIVE YOU CAN SEE OUR
ANNUAL UPDATE AND OUR ANNUAL
SNAPSHOT AND THE SLIDE ALSO
SHOWS OUR OVERALL NETWORK
PROPOSED NETWORK WHICH GIVES
THE THE DIFFERENT TYPES
OF FACILITIES THAT WE EXPECT TO
HAVE IN THE NETWORK TRAILS,
LOCAL ROADS, MINOR STREETS AND
ALSO MAJOR STREETS LOCAL MINOR
AND MAJOR STREETS ARE ALL
WITHIN THE RIGHT AWAY AND UNDER
OUR CONTROL TRAILS ARE
TYPICALLY IN OUR PARKS AND WE
WORK ON THOSE IN PARTNERSHIP
LOOPS.
I MISSED ONE.
THIS SLIDE READS WHAT DOES ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES MEAN AND WE
HAVE IT PROVIDES A VARIETY
OF IMAGES OF DIFFERENT TYPES
OF FOLKS WHO ARE USING CYCLING
NETWORK.
IT ALSO READS ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES.
A3 CYCLING NETWORKS ARE SYSTEMS
FOR SAFE, COMFORTABLE AND
CONNECTED BIKEWAYS DESIGNED TO
MAKE CYCLING ACCESSIBLE TO AS
MANY PEOPLE AS POSSIBLE
INCLUDING CHILDREN OLDER DOGS
AND PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
FEATURES ARE LOW STRESS
MULTIPLE ROUNDS THAT THEY'RE
EFFICIENT AND THEY ARE
CONNECTED AND ONCE AGAIN WE ARE
TRYING TO CREATE AN ENVIRONMENT
WHERE AS MANY INDIVIDUALS AS
POSSIBLE WILL FEEL COMFORTABLE
CYCLING WHETHER THEY'RE USING
AN ADAPTIVE CYCLE, WHETHER
THEY'RE USING A CARGO CYCLE,
WHETHER THEY'RE CYCLING
INDIVIDUALS OR MULTIPLE AGENTS
.
SO WHAT ARE OUR PROPOSED ROUTE
TYPES?
MY APOLOGIES.
THIS IS A SLIDE ACTUALLY
INTENDED TO DELETE BECAUSE IT'S
NOT PUT OUT THERE VERY CLEARLY.
SO I'M GOING TO GO AHEAD MOVE
FORWARD INTO OUR LOCAL STREETS
SO OUR LOCAL STREETS, OUR
STREETS THAT ARE TWENTY FIVE
MILES PER HOUR OR LESS AND LESS
THAN THREE THOUSAND VEHICLES
PER DAY.
AND AS THE SLIDE READS THESE
STREETS WOULD BE PLACES WHERE
CYCLISTS AND MOTOR SHARE SPACES
IN OUR TOOL KIT WE HAVE
MULTIPLE TOOL KIT SCHOOL TOOLS
FOR THE STREETS.
OUR FIRST TOOL THAT IS LISTED
HERE READS BIKE BOULEVARD AND
WE DESIGNED FEATURES THAT
DISCOURAGE VEHICLE THROUGH
TRIPS AND DESIGN FEATURES THAT
ENCOURAGE SAFE SPACES AND
FACILITATE A COMFORTABLE
EXPERIENCE.
THE SLIDE SHOWS AN IMAGE OF A
BICYCLE BOULEVARD IN VANCOUVER,
CANADA BECAUSE WE DON'T HAVE
ANY IN TOWN YET WE ARE LOOKING
AT WASHINGTON AS ONE OF OUR
FIRST COUPLE OF HOURS BUT ONCE
AGAIN THAT WOULD BE A SHARED
SPACE BETWEEN MOTORISTS AND
CYCLISTS.
ANOTHER TOOL IN THIS TOOL KIT
OUR SHARED LANE MARKINGS AND
SHARE LANE MARKINGS.
ALSO CULTURIST IT'S A BICYCLE
WITH THE TWO ARROW POINTS AND
THEY REALLY DESIGNATE A
PREFERRED ROUTE FOR CYCLISTS
AND RAISE AWARENESS AMONG
MOTORISTS.
>> THEY SHOULD EXPECT CYCLISTS
AND THEY INDICATE WHERE IN THE
LANE THE PROPER RIDING POSITION
IS.
IT'S VERY IMPORTANT TO USE THAT
TOOL IN SOME PLACES BECAUSE
SOMETIMES WE WANT CYCLISTS TO
USE THE FULL LANE AND SOMETIMES
WE NEED THEM TO POSITION
THEMSELVES ON ONE SIDE OF AN
INTERSECTION SO THEY'LL BE IN A
BETTER PLACE ON THE OTHER
INTERSECTION.
>> SO THERE ARE LOTS OF USES
FOR THAT TOOL
.
OUR NEXT SET OF TOOLS ARE FOR
MINOR STREETS AND MINOR STREETS
ARE STREETS THAT HAVE SPEEDS
OF TWENTY FIVE TO THIRTY MILES
PER HOUR AND LESS THAN TEN
THOUSAND VEHICLES PER DAY.
SO THESE STREETS WILL HAVE
DEDICATED CYCLISTS BASIS AND
TWO OF OUR TOOLS THAT ARE IN
THE MINOR STREETS TOOL THAT ARE
LISTED HERE ARE STRAIGHT OR
PAINTED BIKE LANES AND THESE
DEMARCATE A PORTION OF THE
STREET CYCLING AND THEY MAY
ALSO INCLUDE GREEN PAINT AT
CONFLICT MARKS OR CONFLICT
POINTS AND THE NEXT TOOL IS
CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANES AND THESE
ARE ALSO STRIPED OR PAINTED
BIKE LANES THAT PROVIDE TWO WAY
BICYCLE TRAVEL ON ONE WAY
STREETS TO IMPROVE CYCLIST
CONNECTIVITY AND DESIGNER AREAS
OF FOCUS FOR THESE ELEMENTS ARE
INCLUDE
TURNING CONFLICTS AT
DRIVEWAYS AND INTERSECTIONS AND
THE SITE IS ACCOMPANIED BY AN
IMAGE THAT SHOWS SOME
INDIVIDUALS CYCLING IN A
CONTRAFLOW BIKE LANE AND IT'S
AN IMAGE FROM PIT BIKES APG AND
IT WAS PROVIDED BY THE DESIGN
GROUP THE LAST TOOL IN OUR
MINOR STREETS TOOL KIT OUR OUR
OUR BIKE LANES AND THESE TOOLS
DEMARCATED PORTION OF THE
STREET FOR CYCLING WHILE
CREATING GREATER SEPARATION
BETWEEN CYCLISTS AND MOTOR
VEHICLES.
>> SO ALL OF THESE ALL OF THESE
TOOLS ARE RELATIVELY EASY TO
INSTALL AND CAN FREQUENTLY ALSO
BE INSTALLED AS A TEST CASE
BECAUSE THEY ARE PAVEMENT
MARKINGS AND SO WE ARE ABLE TO
GET THEM IN WITH PROJECTS.
>> OUR NEXT STEP TOOLS ARE FOR
OUR STREETS AND THESE ARE AREAS
THAT HAVE FIVE MILES PER HOUR
OR GREATER SPEEDS AND OR
GREATER THAN TEN THOUSAND
VEHICLES PER DAY.
>> SO EVEN IF WE WERE LOOKING
AT A LOWER SPEED STREET THAT
HAD HIGHER VOLUME WE WOULD BE
LOOKING AT TOOLS IN THIS
PARTICULAR TOOLKIT.
AS THE SIDE READS THESE ARE
PHYSICALLY SEPARATED CYCLISTS
BASIS AND THE FIRST TOOL FIRST
TOOL IS PROTECTED BIKE LANES.
SO THESE ARE FACILITIES THAT
RUN AT STREET LEVEL BUT ARE
PHYSICALLY SEPARATED FROM
VEHICLES AND I HAVE THREE
ESSENTIAL WAYS THAT YOU CAN
PROVIDE THAT SEPARATION WHICH
IS FLEXIBLE DELINEATOR PARKING
LANES, CURVES OF CONCRETE
MEDIANS AND INCLUDE TURNING
COMPLEX AT DRIVEWAYS AND
INTERSECTIONS AND THE NEXT TOOL
IS RAISED BIKE LANES AND THESE
ARE LANES THAT RUN AT SIDEWALK
LEVEL AND ARE SEPARATED FROM
VEHICLES AND FROM PEDESTRIANS.
>> THE IMAGE THAT ACCOMPANIES
THE SLIDE IS OF OUR WILLIAM
STREET TO A CYCLE TRACK AND IT
ALSO SHOWS SOME CYCLISTS OF A
VARIETY OF AGES INCLUDING CHAD
THE LAST FULL IN OUR MAJOR
STREETS TALK AT IS ARE
PHYSICALLY SEPARATED CYCLISTS
SPACES SO THESE CAN BE OFF
STREET SHARED USE PATHS.
THESE ARE JUST PATHS BIKING
FACILITIES THAT ARE PHYSICALLY
SEPARATED FROM VEHICLES BY OPEN
SPACE OR BARRIERS AND THEY THEY
CAN COMPLIMENT ON STREET ROUTES
AND THEY CAN FACILITATE LONG
DISTANCE COMMUTING.
THE IMAGE THAT I PROVIDED HERE
IS A CONCEPT SKETCH OF THE
BARTON JANDAMARRA CONNECTION
AND THIS IS A PROJECT THAT
PARKS IS LEADING.
BUT WHEN YOU CONSIDER THE FACT
THIS IS PART OF THE BORDER TO
BORDER TRADE, IT REALLY FITS
INTO THAT LONG DISTANCE
COMMUTING CONCEPT THAT WAS A
LOT OF INFORMATION.
IF ANYONE HAS A QUESTION THAT
THEY'RE REALLY DYING TO ASK
RIGHT NOW, I'D LIKE TO GO AHEAD
AND GIVE FOLKS A MOMENT AND
THEN WE CAN GO ON TO THE
IMPLEMENTING SIDE OF THINGS.
ERIC.
>> YEAH.
THANKS FOR THE PRESENTATION.
IT HELPS TO SEE WHY SOME
STREETS ARE TREATED A CERTAIN
WAY AND WHY OTHERS ARE TREATED
DIFFERENTLY, ESPECIALLY HOW
THEY'RE DIVIDED.
I HAD A QUESTION RELATED TO THE
PLANS WITH THE NEXT SEPARATED
TO A CYCLE TRACK WHICH IS
MILLER WHAT WHAT WOULD MILLER
BE CONSIDERED IN THIS?
>> WOULD IT BE CONSIDERED A
MAJOR STREET AND IS THAT WHY
WE'RE CONSIDERING IT FOR
SEPARATED FACILITY?
THAT'S A GREAT QUESTION.
YES.
MILLER IS CONSIDERED TO BE A
MAJOR STREET ALL AGES AND
ABILITIES CONNECTION AND SO IN
THE DESIGN PROCESS FOR MILLER
OUT THERE WE LOOKED AT A LOT
OF DIFFERENT OPTIONS FOR HOW TO
FULFILL THAT GOAL.
>> AND YOU KNOW, THE FIRST
CHOICE WELL, I DON'T KNOW IF I
WANT TO SAY THE FIRST CHOICE WE
LOOKED AT HOW CAN YOU PROTECT
AND STREAMLINE TRAVEL AND WE
LOOKED AT COULD WE ELEVATE AND
WE LOOKED AT DOES IT MAKE MORE
SENSE TO CONTINUE THE CHEWEY
CYCLE TRACK FROM DOWNTOWN
TOWARDS THE EDGE OF LIMITS AND
ON A PROJECT LIKE MILLER WHERE
YOU HAVE A REALLY CONSTRAINED
RIGHT OF WAY AND YOU HAVE YOU
YOU DON'T HAVE A LOT OF WIDTH
IN THE RIGHT OF WAY.
YOU HAVE EVEN LESS IN THE
PHYSICAL STREET WHEN YOU'RE NOT
DOING WORKING ON A COMPLETE
RECONSTRUCTION THEN YOU HAVE
THAT'S PART OF THE CONSTRAINTS
THAT YOU'RE LOOKING AT BUT
THAT'S WHY MILLER HAS A TWO WAY
CYCLE TRACK DESIGN BECAUSE IT
IS IT IS A CORRIDOR THAT WE
WANT TO HAVE THAT HIGHER LEVEL
DESIGN.
I REALLY APPRECIATE ALL THE
THOUGHT THAT YOU GUYS PUT INTO
THAT BECAUSE IT'S OBVIOUS THAT
A LOT OF DIFFERENT OPTIONS WERE
CONSIDERED AND THAT FROM AN
ENGINEERING STANDPOINT I FEEL
LIKE WHAT THE PLAN ENDED UP
BEING OVER THE COURSE OF MANY,
MANY MONTHS OF INPUT IS REALLY
GOOD AND I LOOK FORWARD TO IT.
ONE OF MY BIG COMPLAINTS FOR
THE PROTECTED NETWORK THAT WE
HAVE SO FAR IS JUST THAT IT'S
NOT IT'S NOT ENOUGH AND IT
DOESN'T MUCH ON OUR MAJOR
STREETS BECAUSE IT'S KIND OF ,
YOU KNOW, BOUNDED BY THE DENHA
AREA.
SO TO HAVE THIS START TO BECOME
A REALITY HOPEFULLY WITH THIS
AND THE PROJECT WE JUST HEARD
ABOUT GATHERING DATA ON THE
OTHER MAJOR CORRIDORS HOPEFULLY
WE CAN SEE MORE OF A COMPLETE
NETWORK STARTING TO DEVELOP.
SO I REALLY APPRECIATE YOUR
WORK ON IT, KATE I CYNTHIA,
THANK YOU SO MUCH FOR THE
PRESENTATION AND YOU KNOW ALL
THE WORK AND THOUGHT THAT GOES
INTO THIS I AND THIS WILL
PROBABLY BE SOMETHING THAT I
TALK ABOUT OFTEN IN THESE
MEETINGS BUT I DO STRUGGLE A
LOT WITH THE TREATMENTS WITH
REGARD TO TO MINOR STREETS IF
I'M REMEMBERING THE VERBIAGE
CORRECTLY AND I RECOGNIZE WE
CAN'T HAVE AN ENTIRELY
SEPARATED BIKE NETWORK BUT AS
SOMEONE WHO SPENT 13 YEARS
BIKING WITH CHILDREN, YOU KNOW
WHEN YOU GO THROUGH SOMETHING
LIKE THE CONCEPT OF A SHIRO'S
LIKE THAT REQUIRES A FRONTAL
LOBE CAPACITY THAT MY CHILDREN
AT 13 AND 11 ARE YEARS AWAY
FROM.
SO I THINK I PUSH BACK AGAINST
THE IDEA THAT THOSE FACILITIES
ARE MEANINGFUL IN TERMS
OF ALLOWING FOR CHILDREN AND
AND AND OTHER PEOPLE THAT YOU
KNOW, MAY HAVE CERTAIN
DISABILITIES OR OTHER ISSUES TO
REALLY UTILIZE THOSE FACILITIES
.
I KNOW THAT THERE IS AND I
THINK EVEN THIS CONCEPT OF A
TWENTY FIVE MILE PER HOUR
STREET WITH PAINT BEING SOMEHOW
PROTECTIVE BECAUSE IF YOU'VE
EVER BIKED WITH A CHILD THEY
CAN'T GO IN A STRAIGHT LINE AND
THE PAINT AGAIN MEANS NOTHING
TO THEM BECAUSE THEY DON'T HAVE
THEY JUST DON'T HAVE THAT LEVEL
OF CRITICAL THINKING TO TO
NAVIGATE THESE THINGS SAFELY.
SO YOU KNOW WHAT I ALWAYS FALL
BACK ON IS UTILIZING SIDEWALKS
AND THAT WORKS PRETTY WELL IN
NEIGHBORHOODS I HAVE BEEN
SCREAMED AT ON MAIN STREET FOR
THAT.
SO I GUESS I JUST WANT TO
RECOGNIZE THAT WHILE THESE
CONCEPTS LIKE MAKE SENSE ON
SOME LEVEL IN PRACTICE IT
DOESN'T MEAN FOR IN MY MIND
REALLY CREATE THAT KIND
NETWORK.
I THINK SAME THING FOR LIKE I
THINK ABOUT SOMEONE IN A
WHEELCHAIR TRYING TO USE A
PACKARD YOU KNOW, SEPARATED
LANE WITH PAINT LIKE THAT WOULD
BE THE THE LEAST SAFE THING I
COULD IMAGINE.
SO JUST WANTED WANTED TO BRING
THAT UP AND YOU KNOW NOT TO BE
CRITICAL BUT JUST TO BE
THOUGHTFUL ABOUT YOU KNOW WHAT
WHAT APPLICATIONS ARE ACTUALLY
GOING TO MAKE US ACHIEVE OUR
GOAL OF HAVING A TRULY
CONNECTED NETWORK THAT IS FOR
ALL AGES AND ABILITIES AND
THOSE ARE GREAT QUESTIONS AND I
THINK PART OF IT IS REALLY
UNDERSTANDING THE WHERE THE
WHERE SOME OF THESE FACILITIES
COULD POSSIBLY BE AND WHEN
WE'RE REALLY LOOKING AT WHEN
WE'RE LOOKING AT THE NETWORK
AND SOME OF IT IS A LOT
OF THOSE TYPES OF FACILITIES,
SOME MORE OF THOSE ARE REALLY
LOWER VOLUME STREETS OR CITY
STREETS THAN WE WOULD EXPECT TO
SEE MORE IN SOME NEIGHBORHOODS
IN SOME PLACES BECAUSE BECAUSE
THEY ARE THOSE LOWER SPEEDS IN
THOSE LOWER VOLUME AND WHEN I
MEAN I I DO UNDERSTAND THAT ALL
AGES AND ABILITIES IS AS A
CONCEPT IS TO GET AS MANY AS
MANY PEOPLE INCORPORATED INTO
THE DESIGN AS POSSIBLE.
BUT THERE WILL BE SOME
INDIVIDUALS WHO WILL STILL NEED
TO USE SOMETHING LIKE
ESCITALOPRAM ESPECIALLY AS
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT COGNITIVE
ABILITIES WHERE INDIVIDUALS ARE
NOT YET ABLE TO PROCESS LIKE
VEHICLES OF THINGS.
>> SO I DO APPRECIATE
THAT
PERSPECTIVE BEING A A MOTHER
WHO'S CYCLED WITH MY CHILDREN
AS WELL.
>> I DO UNDERSTAND AND
APPRECIATE THAT RACHEL.
>> YEAH, I WANT TO UNDERSCORE I
REALLY APPRECIATE THE WAY THAT
THIS IS CATEGORIZED AND I DO
THINK THAT FOR THE AVERAGE
CYCLIST IT IS TOTALLY SENSIBLE
AND I WANT TO JUST KIND
OF BUILD OFF OF ITS COMMENT
THAT CERTAINLY THERE ARE PLACES
WHERE VARIOUS TYPES OF CYCLISTS
WILL NEED TO USE THE SIDEWALK
NETWORK INSTEAD OF USING A
SHIRO'S OR THINGS LIKE THAT AND
I AM WONDERING IF AS YOU ARE
CREATING THESE CONCEPTS AND
THINKING ABOUT THE CITY'S PLANS
FOR IMPLEMENTING THEM HOW YOU
WERE THINKING ABOUT THE
SIDEWALK NETWORK AS INTEGRATED
INTO ALL AGES AND ABILITY
CYCLING INFRASTRUCTURE I'M SURE
JUST LIKE I HAVE MANY STORIES
OF BEING SCREAMED AT BOTH ON
THE ROAD AND ON THE SIDEWALK
THAT IS CERTAINLY LIKE A
CULTURAL AND AN EDUCATION ISSUE
THAT YOU KNOW, THERE ARE LOTS
OF THINGS THAT WE CAN ALL BE
DOING TO SUPPORT AND THEN
THERE'S ALSO MAINTENANCE
OF BOTH THE BICYCLE FACILITIES
AND THE SIDEWALK NETWORK THAT
FACILITATES THAT THE ABILITY
OF FOLKS OF VARYING AGES AND
ABILITIES TO GET FROM PLACE TO
PLACE ON A BIKE.
YOU KNOW, THAT'S BOTH YOU KNOW,
THAT'S EVERYTHING FROM LIKE YOU
KNOW, SURFACING TO SNOW AND ICE
REMOVAL AND I THINK THAT YEAH,
I WOULD LOVE TO HEAR IF THAT'S
SOMETHING IF YOU WERE THINKING
ABOUT THOSE THINGS TOGETHER
WHEN YOU WHEN YOU THINK ABOUT
HOW THIS INFRASTRUCTURE WILL BE
UTILIZED BY PEOPLE OF VARYING
AGES AND ABILITIES.
NOW IF I MAY, MR. JACOBSON, I'M
GOING TO PARKING LOT THOSE
QUESTIONS BECAUSE I THINK
WALKING THROUGH OUR EXAMPLE IS
GOING TO HELP ILLUSTRATE SOME
OF THEM.
AND IF WHEN WE GET THROUGH OUR
EXAMPLE I HAVE NOT ANSWERED
THEM AS FULLY LET'S CIRCLE BACK
AROUND TO SO THE NEXT THING
THAT I WANTED TO COVER WAS AS
PART OF HI.
YEAH THIS IS GREAT.
HOW DO WE IMPLEMENT IT?
SO IS THE SLIDES READS WHAT ARE
OUR STRATEGIES AND WE ALL NEED
TO WORK TOGETHER AND IT TAKES
ALL SIX OF OUR EYES TO EVALUATE
TO IMPLEMENT OUR PLAN.
BUT THIS PARTICULAR STRATEGY IS
REALLY PART OF ENGINEERING,
PART OF TRANSPORTATION AND WE
ARE NOT LOOKING AS MUCH AT
EVALUATION AS PART OF IT BUT
NOT AS MUCH ON THE EDUCATION,
THE ENCOURAGEMENT, THE EQUITY
IN THE ENFORCEMENT IS WE HAVE
EIGHT GENERAL PROGRAM AREAS
THAT WE'RE REALLY LOOKING AT
RESPONSIBLE FOR THE FIRST ONE
IS BEHAVIOR CHANGE.
THE SECOND IS THE SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM THE THE NEXT
STREET CONFIGURATION OF RUDDI
STREET CONFIGURATION FOR
INTERSECTIONS OR OTHER AND OUR
QUICK BUILD PROGRAM, OUR
CAPITAL INVESTMENT, OUR
MESSAGING CAMPAIGNS AND OUR
EDUCATION ENFORCEMENT CAMPAIGN
MEANS THAT WE'RE WORKING ON
IMPLEMENTING CYCLING AND
CYCLING CHANGES REALLY IT COULD
BE PART OF THE SPEED OF SPEED
MANAGEMENT CHOICE.
IT COULD BE PART OF A STREET
RECONFIGURATION.
IT COULD BE PART OF A QUICK
BUILD.
OUR EXAMPLE THAT I'M GOING TO
IT IS PART OF OUR CAPITAL
INVESTMENT BECAUSE IT IT IS
FIFTH BUT IT THIS THIS EXAMPLE
WILL ALSO TOUCH ON OUR SPEED
MANAGEMENT.
>> SO OUR DESIGN EXAMPLE AND WE
JUST HAVE AN IMAGE HERE THAT IS
REPRESENTS CAPITAL INVESTMENT.
OUR SLIDE READS DESIGN EXAMPLE
FIFTH AVENUE WATER MAIN AND
RESURFACING SO WE HAVE WATER IN
REPLACEMENT THAT'S GOING ON.
WE HAVE RESURFACING AND
PAVEMENT THAT'S GOING ON AND AS
WE STARTED THE DESIGN FOR THIS
PARTICULAR PROJECT WE HAD AN
ONGOING DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION
STUDY THAT WAS INFLUENCING SOME
OF OUR OUTCOMES.
I WANT TO START WITH SOME
EXISTING CONDITIONS.
THIS PROJECT IS FOR FIFTH
AVENUE AND IT RUNS FROM WILLIAM
MADISON.
>> OUR FIRST BLOCK IS WILLIAM
PACKARD EXISTING CONDITIONS ARE
TWO SOUTHBOUND LANES, ONE
SOUTHBOUND CYCLING LANE NO
PARKING.
TWENTY FIVE OUR SPEED LIMIT AND
IT'S A TIER TWO SAFETY CORRIDOR
.
THE NEXT BLOCK IS PACARD TO
MADISON AND THIS IS ONE
SOUTHBOUND VEHICLE LANE WE HAVE
INTERMITTENT PARKING ON BOTH
SIDES OF THE STREET AND A
TWENTY FIVE MILE PER HOUR SPEED
LIMIT AND IT IS ALSO A TIER TWO
SAFETY FOR AND HAVE IMAGES
ACCOMPANYING BOTH OF THESE
SLIDES OF WHAT THE STREET LOOKS
LIKE.
OUR NEXT SLIDE READS ORIGINAL
PROJECT OBJECTIVES.
SO ORIGINALLY WE WANTED TO WORK
WITHIN THE EXISTING FOOTPRINT
OF THE STREET.
>> THAT PROJECT OBJECTIVE HAS
NOT CHANGED.
WE WERE FOCUSING ON MAKING
MINIMAL CHANGES PENDING THE
OUTCOME OF POSSIBLE TO A
CONVERSION ANALYSIS.
SO CONVERTING THE STREET FROM
ONE WAY TRAFFIC TO TWO WAY
TRAFFIC ALONG WITH ITS PARTNER
CORRIDOR WHICH IS DIVISION WE
REALLY WANTED TO SUPPORT
RESIDENTIAL CONNECTION TO THE
HIGH COMFORT CYCLING ROUTE
DOWNTOWN AND PART OF WHAT WE
WERE LOOKING AT AND THIS GOES
TO THE SIDEWALK QUESTION WE
KNOW THAT INDIVIDUALS ARE USING
THE SECTION OF FIFTH TO GET TO
THE WILLIAMS CYCLE TRACK AND TO
GET INTO DOWNTOWN AND SO
THEY'RE CURRENTLY DOING THAT ON
THE SIDEWALK WITH THAT SIDEWALK
BEING LIMITED WITH THAT'S NOT
COMFORTABLE FOR EITHER CYCLISTS
OR PEDESTRIANS.
SO WE'RE REALLY INTERESTED IN
MAKING THAT CONNECTION AND
ULTIMATELY WE ALSO WANTED TO
SLOW TRAFFIC ON THE SECTIONAL
CHANGES A LITTLE BIT
OF BACKGROUND DATA THAT WE HAD.
>> WE HAVE DATA THAT WE
COLLECTED FOR ONE OF OUR
LOCATIONS AND THAT IS BETWEEN
LIBERTY AND WILLIAM ON THIS
PAGE.
>> STANDS FOR HIGHWAY
PERFORMANCE MONITORING SYSTEM.
IT'S NOT AN ACRONYM YOU
NECESSARILY NEED TO REMEMBER
BUT IT'S A PLACE THAT WE
REGULARLY TAKE OUT DATA AT OUR
AVERAGE SPEED IN THAT LOCATION
IS TWENTY THREE MILES PER HOUR.
EIGHTY FIFTH PERCENTILE SPEED.
SO IF YOU THINK OF IT AS A
NORMAL CURVE DISTRIBUTION THAT
EIGHTY FIVE PERCENTILE IS IS
WHERE WE LOOK TO SEE OUR PEOPLE
BEHAVING IN A MANNER THAT WE
WANT THEM TO BEHAVE OR NOT.
SO THE EIGHTY FIVE PERCENT
SPEED IS TWENTY EIGHT MILES PER
HOUR WHICH IS ABOVE WHERE WE
WANT THE 85 PERCENTILE SPEED
BECAUSE WE REALLY DO WANT THAT
TO BEGIN A LITTLE BIT LOWER AND
OUR AVERAGE DAILY TRAFFIC OUT
HERE IS THREE THOUSAND FOUR
HUNDRED NINETY ONE.
SO THAT LEFT US WITH A DESIGN
LEVEL OF MINOR STREET.
NOW AS WE WERE LOOKING AT
IMPLEMENTING THIS ON TO THE
NEXT SLIDE A LITTLE BIT MORE
ABOUT OUR ORIGINAL PROJECT
DESIGN WE WERE WE WANTED TO
TIGHTEN UP THIS CROSS SECTION
FOR VEHICLES AS MUCH AS WE
COULD REALLY SORT OF NARROW
THINGS.
>> SO WE SELECTED A TEN FOOT
VEHICULAR LANE AND THEN LOOKING
AT GETTING SIX FEET BIKE LANES
IN HERE AND NARROW BUFFER FOR
BOTH THE SOUTHBOUND AND THE
NORTHBOUND BIKE LANES.
SO THEY BOTH HAVE ABOUT A TWO
FOOT AS WE WORK THROUGH THIS
DESIGN PROCESS.
WE HEARD MORE ABOUT SPEEDS AND
STARTED TO LOOK AT SPEEDS A
LITTLE BIT MORE AND WE'VE
GOTTEN TO A POINT WITH THE
DOWNTOWN CIRCULATION STUDY
WHERE WE REALLY UNDERSTOOD AND
THAT THAT PROJECT
IMPLEMENTATION IS GOING TO BE
HAPPENING AS EARLY AS WE
THOUGHT IT MIGHT.
WE HAVE ENOUGH ANALYSIS THAT WE
KNOW TO SEE A LITTLE BIT OF A
EVALD REDUCTION TO BE ABLE TO
IMPLEMENT THOSE SUCCESSFULLY
WITHOUT NEGATIVELY IMPACTING
OUR TRANSIT PROVIDER AND WITH
THAT BEING SAID, WE ARE
CURRENTLY LOOKING AT
IMPLEMENTING MORE SPEED
MANAGEMENT IN THIS CORRIDOR AND
WHAT WE KNOW FROM OUR VOLUME IS
THAT WE DO NOT NEED TWO LANES
TO SERVICE THE THE VOLUME THAT
IS ON FIFTH PARTICULARLY SOUTH
WILLIAM AS GETTING GOING SOUTH
OF WILLIAM NO.
IF WE HAVE CLOSE TO THREE
THOUSAND FIVE HUNDRED NORTH
OF WILLIAM WE HAVE A LOT
OF TRAFFIC THAT TURNS OFF A
FIFTH AT THAT POINT AND WE HAVE
EVEN FEWER TRIPS.
SO IF ONE LANE WE'LL SERVICE
THAT VOLUME ONE LANE WILL
SERVICE LESS THAN THAT VOLUME.
SO WE ARE
AS AS THE SIDE READS
NEW PROJECT INFORMATION THE TWO
WAY CONVERSION NEEDS A BIT OF A
VMT REDUCTION TO BE SUCCESSFUL
PARTICULARLY AS IT IS APPLIES
TO OUR TRANSIT PROVIDER AND
WE'VE ALREADY HAD AN
OPPORTUNITY TO SPEAK WITH THE
ARBOR FIRE DEPARTMENT ABOUT CAN
WE EXPLORE THIS OPTION WHERE
WE'RE TAKING AWAY A SOUTHBOUND
VEHICLE LANE BETWEEN ACAD AND
WILLIAM TO CREATE PARKING LANE
THAT WOULD BE A FLOATING
PARKING LANE AND LEARNING FROM
THE LESSONS THAT OF THE LAST
FLOATING PARKING LANE THAT WE
IMPLEMENTED IN THE NEAR
DOWNTOWN AREA LEARNING FROM AND
BEING ABLE TO PROVIDE MORE
SPACE FOR SOLID WASTE SERVICE
AND EVEN MAYBE POSSIBLY PUTTING
IN SOME PARKING RESTRICTIONS ON
SERVICE DAYS BUT ALSO CREATING
A VERTICAL A VERTICAL ELEMENT
TO HELP MOTORISTS HAVE
SOMETHING PHYSICAL TO LINE UP
FOR THEIR PARKING, CREATING A
LITTLE BIT OF A WIDER VEHICLE
LANE TO ACCOMMODATE THE PARKING
VEHICLES AND PROBABLY NOT MUCH
OF A BUFFER FOR S THE
SOUTHBOUND BIKE LANE BUT WE'RE
LOOKING AT A THREE FOOT BUFFER
FOR THAT NORTHBOUND BIKE LANE
TO KEEP THE CYCLISTS OUT OF THE
DOORING AREA.
>> I WILL POINT OUT THAT THIS
LOVELY IMAGE I THREW TOGETHER
IN ST. MARKS DOES NOT HAVE ANY
YELLOW PAVEMENT MARKINGS ON THE
BUFFER BETWEEN SOUTHBOUND AND
NORTHBOUND AND THAT IS JUST
BECAUSE THE FREE PERSON DOESN'T
WANT TO DO THAT.
BUT WHERE THE YELLOW WOULD BE
WOULD BE YELLOW EVEN MARKINGS
BECAUSE DIFFERENT DIRECTIONS
TRAVEL.
SO BACK TO SOME OF THOSE
PARKING LOT OF QUESTIONS.
DO YOU RECONSIDER SILENCE
SIDEWALKS THAT ARE DESIGNED TO
BE SHARED PATHS ARE DEFINITELY
PART OF THE NETWORK WHEN WE
KNOW THAT WE HAVE A LOT
OF CYCLISTS ON A NARROWER
SIDEWALK, WE WANT TO TRY TO
PROVIDE AN ALTERNATIVE FOR
THEM.
THERE WILL ALWAYS BE CYCLISTS
WHO ARE NOT GOING TO FEEL
COMFORTABLE BEING IN THE STREET
AND WOULD PREFER TO BE ON THE
SIDEWALK WHEN THEY ARE LEGALLY
ALLOWED TO BE ON THE SIDEWALKS.
SO WE'RE NOT DESIGNED TO
PREVENT THAT AND IN SOME PLACES
WE ARE DESIGNING TO SUPPORT
DIFFERENT LEVELS OF CYCLISTS
DESIRE.
>> RIGHT.
SO WE THINK OF PLIMOTH WEST
OF NEXEN AND IN THAT AREA WE
HAVE SHARED USE PATHS THAT ARE
SIDE PATHS AND WE ALSO HAVE ON
STREET NEARBY FOR BIKE LANES
FOR INDIVIDUALS WHO WANT TO
HAVE A LITTLE BIT MORE SITE
LIGHT ON THEM.
THEY'RE TRAVELING A LITTLE BIT
FASTER.
THEY WANT TO BE ABLE TO TRAVEL
A LITTLE FASTER AND HAVE BETTER
SIGHTLINES AT DRIVEWAYS AND
THOSE SORTS OF THINGS.
SO SOMETIMES WE'RE ABLE TO
PROVIDE FOR TWO DIFFERENT
LEVELS OF CYCLISTS IN ONE
CORRIDOR BUT WE ARE DEFINITELY
LOOKING AT THOSE TYPES
OF CONCERNS AS WE ARE DESIGN.
>> THAT WAS ALSO A LOT
OF INFORMATION AND BEFORE I
OPENED IT BACK UP TO QUESTIONS
I JUST WANTED TO TOUCH WHAT OUR
NEXT STEPS WOULD BE FOR FOR
THIS PARTICULAR PROJECT WE SAW
SOME INTERNAL STAKEHOLDERS TO
ENGAGE WITH AND WE REALLY NEED
TO MAKE SURE THAT WE CAN DESIGN
TO TO MEET ALL THE NEEDS THAT
ARE FUNCTIONING IN THE CORRIDOR
AND WE WANT TO WE'LL NEED TO
FINALIZE THAT DESIGN AND
DETERMINE THE FEASIBILITY
OF THE DESIGN IF IT'S GOING TO
WORK AND THEN WE'LL BE
COMMUNICATING THE FINAL DESIGN
OUT TO THE PUBLIC.
>> WE'RE GOING TO BE BUILDING
AND ENGAGING IN OUR HOME PAGE
FOR THAT.
ONE OF OUR PLANS IS TO
CAPITALIZE ON THE COMMUNITY
QUESTIONS FEATURE OF THAT SO
THAT WE CAN KEEP THAT OPEN AND
CONTINUE TO HAVE CONVERSATION
WITH THE PUBLIC ESPECIALLY
AFTER IT OPENS WITH INDIVIDUALS
HAVE QUESTIONS ABOUT THAT BEING
SAID, I WOULD LOVE TO ENTERTAIN
ANY QUESTIONS ABOUT CYCLING
DESIGN IN THE PULSERS IF YOU
ALREADY EXPLAINED WHY THIS WAS
AND I JUST MISSED AND I'M SURE
THERE'S A GOOD REASON BUT CAN
YOU EXPLAIN WHY THE BIKE LANES
ARE ON OPPOSITE SIDES OF THE
STREET AS OPPOSED TO PROTECTING
THEM BOTH BY THE PARKED CARS?
>> YEAH, ONE OF THE THINGS TO
KEEP IN MIND ABOUT A TWO CYCLE
TRACK IS THAT IT DOES HAVE IT
DOES HAVE SOME CONCERNS AND ONE
OF THE LARGEST CONCERNS IS
GETTING PEOPLE INTO IT OUT
OF THE CYCLE TRACK AND BECAUSE
THAT IS SUCH A HIGH
COMFORT FACILITY, HAS SUCH A
HIGH DESIGN BURDEN.
IT HAS SUCH A HIGH MAINTENANCE
BURDEN.
IT'S TO HAVE TWO PARALLEL OUTS
THAT ARE THAT REALLY HIGH
COMFORT FACILITY IS A LITTLE
BIT UNUSUAL BUT WE WANT TO
PROVIDE AS MUCH DIRECT ACCESS
FOR CYCLISTS AS POSSIBLE AND
IT'S YEAH, IT'S ALSO LOOKING AT
THE AND RUNNING IT THROUGH THE
EVALUATION DETERMINING WHAT
TYPE OF FACILITY SHOULD GO
THERE
.
OTHER COMMENTS OR QUESTIONS
>> BUT AS ALWAYS, THANKS FOR
COMING BACK AND GIVING US THE
REFRESHER IN THE FIRST PART AND
THEN ALSO YOU TAKING INTO
ACCOUNT COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS
ABOUT THE FIFTH AVENUE DESIGN
AND THEN COMING BACK TO EXPLAIN
IT TO US SO MUCH APPRECIATE.
ALL RIGHT.
LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING YOU
AGAIN.
ALL RIGHT.
LET'S MOVE ON TO THE FISCAL
YEAR TWENTY TWENTY SIX POLICY
AGENDA FOR LOCAL ITEMS EVERY
YEAR WE PASS ALONG POLICY AND
LEGISLATION SUGGESTIONS TO THE
CITY COUNCIL POLICY AGENDA
COMMITTEE CONCERNING LOCAL AND
STATE ISSUES.
SO WE'VE REVIEWED THE STATE
LEVEL POLICY ITEMS BACK IN
JANUARY.
TONIGHT WE'D LIKE TO TAKE A
LOOK AT SOME LOCAL POLICY ITEMS
AND THEN AFTER GOING THROUGH
THAT THIS AT THIS MEETING
HOPEFULLY NEXT MONTH WE'LL HAVE
SOMETHING THAT WE CAN VOTE ON
TO TO SEND TO CITY COUNCIL.
SO LUKE, YOU'VE GOT AT THIS UP
SO AND GOING THROUGH THESE FOR
THE LOCAL PORTION I GUESS YOU
CAN GO THROUGH ONE AT A TIME TO
SEE WHAT WE'VE GOT HERE BUT YOU
KNOW THAT THIS CAN BE
INTERACTIVE TO SOMEBODY AS YOU
KNOW COMMENTS JUST I'D SAY MAKE
THOSE COMMENTS AS WE'RE GOING
THROUGH THIS INSTEAD OF WAITING
TO THE END, OK?
YEAH, I'LL READ THEM SO THEY'RE
NOT TOO LONG BUT FEEL FREE TO
STOP ME IF THERE'S ANY COMMENTS
OR CHANGES PROPOSED.
FIRST THE BULLET POINT
STRENGTHEN PARTNERSHIPS WITH
COMMUNITY STAKEHOLDERS TO
ACHIEVE COMMON GOALS INCLUDING
BUT NOT LIMITED TO THE MICHIGAN
DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION
AND OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS AND THE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN.
>> AND NEXT ONE IS PRIORITIZED
DATA DRIVEN DECISION MAKING AT
THE LOCAL LEVEL BY EXPANDING
USE OF BENCHMARK AND
STATISTICAL DATA COLLECTION.
YES, IT MIGHT BE NICE TO ADD
WHAT WE'RE THINKING OF THERE
LIKE WHAT ARE THE WHAT ARE THE
CRITICAL FEW THAT WE WANT TO
COLLECT DATA?
SO WE HEARD ON THE OTHER DAY
FROM IN THE RESOLUTION WAS
PASSED BY COUNCIL ABOUT HOW
OFTEN BIKE LANES ARE BLOCKED.
WE HAVE A RESOLUTION THAT ASKS
TO DEVELOP THOSE METRICS AND
THEN REPORT ON THEM.
I CAN THINK OF SOME OTHER
METRICS LIKE THE CONFORMANCE TO
OUR WINTER MAINTENANCE STANDARD
FOR SHOVELING.
HOW ARE WE DOING ON THAT?
IT WOULD BE GOOD TO KNOW HOW
ARE WE DOING IN CONFORMING TO
OUR CROSSWALK DRIVER COMPLIANCE
TO OUR CROSSWALKS.
SO I WOULD LIKE TO SEE SOME
LISTING OF THE THINGS THAT WE
THINK ARE IMPORTANT TO MAKE THE
TRANSPORTATION SYSTEM AS GOOD
AS POSSIBLE AND WE SHOULD BE
TRACKING THOSE.
>> SO YEAH, CRASH REPORTING
SPEED STUDIES IT IS YEAH I I
LIKE THAT STATEMENT AROUND
INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
THESE
COULD BE USEFUL.
OK THANKS.
ALL RIGHT NEXT ONE IS USE
ACCESS TO DESTINATION'S FOR
EXAMPLE ACCESS TO JOBS FOOD
SCHOOL ETC. AS AN EVALUATION
THE CRITERION FOR ANALYSIS
OF TRANSPORTATION INVESTMENTS
THAT'S ONE IS USE BIKE LANE AND
SIDEWALK CONNECTIVITY AS AN
IMPORTANT METRIC BY WHICH TO
PRIORITIZE TRANSPORTATION,
INVEST
ONE OF THAT ONE, EXPAND
THE BICYCLE PURCHASE INCENTIVE
PROGRAM.
CONSIDER INCLUDING NUNA
ELECTRIC BIKES NEXT ONE
INCREASE THE AMOUNT OF FUNDING
FOR NON MOTORIZED AND ACTIVE
TRANSPORTATION PROJECTS TO
BETTER ALIGN WITH OUR CLIMATE
AND SAFETY GOALS.
OK CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE FOR
LOCAL LEVEL POLICY AND LAND USE
INVESTMENTS THAT ENCOURAGE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRANSIT
SUPPORTED DEVELOPMENT.
SO THIS WHY IS THIS HAS ALREADY
SEEN SOME SOME PROGRESS SO WE
STILL WANT TO KEEP THIS HERE OR
DO WE WANT TO REMOVE IT OR
ASSUME THIS IS GETTING AT T ONE
TO I THINK THE FIRST FEW WORDS
CONTINUE TO ADVOCATE OK, IF
THERE ARE OTHER OPPORTUNITIES
OR ONE TO BE APPLIED AND AS THE
CITY IS GOING THROUGH A
COMPREHENSIVE PLAN REDOING THAT
THIS YEAR, I THINK IT'S
REASONABLE TO KEEP IT
ABSOLUTELY ADVOCATE FOR PUBLIC
TRANSIT BECOMING AN INCREASING
COMPETITIVE ALTERNATIVE TO THE
CAR BY SUPPORTING THE RIGHTS A
LONG RANGE PLAN FOR IMPROVED
SERVICES THAT'S THE RIGHT
TWENTY FORTY FIVE PLAN AND TWO
THERE'S THROUGH POLICIES AND
ACTIONS INCLUDING THE FOLLOWING
CONTINUED ADVOCACY FOR LOCAL
LEVEL POLICY AND LAND USE
INVESTMENT THAT ENCOURAGE
OPPORTUNITIES FOR TRANSIT
SUPPORTED DEVELOPMENT ALLOWING
HIGH FREQUENCY TRANSIT
CORRIDORS, ENCOURAGEMENT OF ALL
NEW MUNICIPAL FACILITIES FOR
THE PUBLIC TO BE SITED ALONG
EXISTING TRANSIT ROUTES
AND
INCREASING ON TIME TRAVEL ON
BUS ROUTES WAS TRANSIT ONLY
LANES SIGNALS AND OTHER
PRIORITY MEASURES THAT
PRIORITIZE POLICIES.
THIS MAY INCLUDE RESTRICTING
CERTAIN STREETS TO TRANSIT
PEDESTRIAN AND BICYCLE TRAVEL
ONLY IF I COULD INTERRUPT
BRIEFLY RICHARD A GOOD QUESTION
ABOUT STATE LEVEL POLICY
OBJECTIVES AND IS THERE TIME AN
OPPORTUNITY TO HAVE SOME
COMMENT ON THOSE BEFORE WE VOTE
ON THEM?
REMIND ME.
LOOK, WE THIS IS ALL COMBINED
TOGETHER.
WE HAVE ALREADY APPROVED THE
STATE OF SO I THINK IT'S
ESPECIALLY CONSIDERING RACHEL
IS NEW TO THE COMMISSION.
I WOULD LOVE TO HEAR HER
COMMENTS ON THE STATE OBJECTIVE
,THE STATE LEVEL OBJECTIVES IF
YOU WOULD IF YOU'RE OPEN TO
MAYBE EMAILING THEM TO TO LUC
AND MAYBE MYSELF AND KATE
RACHEL THAT WAY WE CAN MAYBE
WORK THEM IN AND HAVE SOMETHING
MORE PREPARED IN THE DOCUMENT
AT NEXT MONTH'S MEETING SO IT'S
EASIER TO VOTE ON IT.
I JUST IF IT'S POSSIBLE TO
AVOID DOING LIKE SOMETHING TOO
MUCH AT NEXT MONTH'S MEETING,
IT'S HARD TO VOTE ON SOMETHING
WHEN WE'RE DOING SOMETHING IN
THE SAME MEETING.
SO PLEASE I'D LOVE TO TO SEE
WHAT YOU HAVE, WHAT YOUR
THOUGHTS ARE ON THE STATE LEVEL
STUFF.
SO YEAH, SEND THOSE ALONG AND
THEN POST ANYONE TO IF YOU HAVE
OTHER THOUGHTS THAT HAVE COME
UP OVER THE LAST MONTH TO SEND
THOSE ALONG.
>> OK, WE'LL DO.
THANKS BRET.
>> THANK YOU SIR.
YOU'RE GOOD THANK YOU.
AND ALSO FOR THIS YEAR ABOUT
OUR MONTH ARRANGEMENT WHERE
ONCE WE FINISH THIS ROUND OUR
NEXT ROUND ASSERI WILL BE
KICKED OUT PRETTY SOON.
SO WE'RE TALKING ABOUT AROUND
SUMMER TIME SO WE'RE GOING TO
REVIEW THESE TWO GROUPS
OF POLICIES AGAIN SO THAT THEY
MAKE LIKE IN TIME INTO THE THE
CITY'S OVERALL POLICY AGENDA
GOING OUT.
>> SO OK, NEXT ONE IS STRIVING
TO MAKE TRANSIT COMMUTING
FASTER, MORE CONVENIENT AND
CHEAPER THAN CAR COMMUTING BY
RESTRUCTURING PARKING FEES AND
INCREASING BUS FREQUENCY ON
ROUTES AT THE BUSIEST TIME
OF DAY.
>> I SEE PETE YEAH.
I'D LIKE TO JUST EXPLICITLY SAY
THAT WE SHOULD AND WE SHOULD
COME UP WITH A PLAN TO PHASE
OUT MONTHLY PARKING DOWNTOWN
AND INSTEAD ENCOURAGE MONTHLY
BUS PASS PURCHASES
ONCE SOMEONE
BUYS A MONTHLY PERMIT TO PARK
DOWNTOWN, THEY NEED TO USE IT
EVERY DAY TO GET THEIR MONEY'S
WORTH OUT OF IT.
AND IF ANYONE OBJECTS TO IT,
LET US KNOW.
BUT I'D BE HAPPY ADDING THAT TO
THIS.
>> OK, THANK YOU.
>> THANKS ONE AS BUS STOPS ARE
A PUBLIC GOOD AND THE KEY
ELEMENT IN ACHIEVING STRATEGIC
GOALS REMOVAL OF PERMITTING
FEES TO THE RIGHT FOR THE
INSTALLATION AND MODIFICATION
ON BUS STOPS WITHIN CITY RIGHT
AWAY AND EXPEDITION
OF PERMITTING APPROVAL PROCESS
CONTINUE THE COORDINATION FOR
INSTALLATION OF LEAD WALKS AND
OTHER CONCRETE AMENITIES AT BUS
STOP LOCATIONS AFFECTED BY CITY
ROAD OR SIDEWALK RECONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS
COLLABORATION WITH THE
CITY PUBLIC WORKS PUBLIC WORKS
GROUP TO REMOVE OR AVOID
CREATING PILES OF SNOW OR
WINDROW ALONG THE CURBS IN
FRONT OF BUS STOPS AS THEY CAN
BECOME IMPASSABLE TO RIDERS AND
BUSSES
.
>> THANKS FOR THE POINT.
TAKING ENFORCEMENT ACTION TO
MAINTAIN CLEAR BIKE LANES THIS
MAY INCLUDE LAUNCHING A BOUNTY
PROGRAM WHEREBY CITIZENS CAN
REPORT INFRACTIONS.
IS THIS SOMETHING THE COUNCIL
HAS MADE ENOUGH PROGRESS ON FOR
US TO REMOVE AND HAVE THOUGHTS
ON THAT
?
DO YOU THINK WE SHOULD REMOVE
MECCANO
SO ON THIS ONE WHEN
NEXT MONTH WE'RE THINKING ABOUT
HAVING PUBLIC WORKS TO COME IN
AND GIVE US AN UPDATE SO YEAH,
THAT
NEXT YEAR I THINK THIS ONE
IS WELL I DON'T KNOW IF WE CAN
SAY IT'S FULLY IMPLEMENTED YET
BUT WE'RE CERTAINLY WORKING ON
THIS, YOU KNOW.
>> OK, WITH THAT NEXT ONE
ENSURE THAT THE TRAFFIC CALMING
RESOLUTION PASSED IN TWENTY
TWENTY THREE IS PUT INTO ACTION
AND THAT TRAFFIC CALMING IS
INCORPORATE INTO OUR STREET
RESURFACING PROJECTS.
SO THIS IS SIMILAR TO THE ONE
ABOVE THAT WE'RE SETTING UP THE
OVERALL GUIDANCE DOCUMENT TO
COVER THESE TWO BULLET POINTS.
>> YEAH, I WOULD JUST SAY IT'S
A SMALL THING BUT WHEN YOU SAY
STREET RESURFACING PROJECTS
MAYBE JUST SAY STREET CAPITAL
PROJECTS.
I MEAN WHETHER YOU'RE YOU KNOW,
WORKING ON A WATER LINE OR
YOU'RE DOING A RECONSTRUCT THIS
ONE TO MAKE SURE IT'S OPEN TO
ANYTHING THAT COULD BE
HAPPENING ON THE STREET RIGHT.
ONE IS DEFINED TRANSPORTATION
INFRASTRUCTURE IS TO BE USED TO
AND DISTINGUISH A DIFFERENCE
BETWEEN STREETS, ROADS AND
STREET ROADS.
THIS MAY INCLUDE DEVELOPMENT
OF RIGHT AWAY PLANS AND
ALIGNMENT WITH ADJACENT LAND
USE, ESPECIALLY
ONE THIS BEEN
DIFFICULT FOR ME.
I, I, I DON'T KNOW HOW WE CAN
CHECK IT OFF TO SAY THAT IT'S
SOMETHING THAT'S BEEN
ACCOMPLISHED.
>> THEY HAVE ANY COMMENTS OR
THOUGHTS ON THIS ONE?
>> MAYBE THE BACKGROUND ON THIS
INTENT AND HOW THE TERM STROH'S
MAYBE YOU FLY MORE IN THE
PLANNING CIRCLE IN OUR DAY TO
DAY SORT INTERACTIONS WITH
PROJECTS THE STAFF FROM THE
FOURTH FLOOR WE WE HAVE NOT
VERY COME ACROSS THIS TERM EVEN
ONES
OK RIGHT.
THERE ARE SOME YOU THAT WE CAN
ALWAYS ACCOMMODATE NEXT WHY IS
TO EXPAND AND IMPROVE
INFRASTRUCTURE AND THE POLICY
TO ENCOURAGE THE USE OF CLEAN
ENERGY VEHICLES.
THAT INCLUDES A COUPLE OF SUPPO
AND MORE ELECTRIC VEHICLE
CHARGE POINTS PARADE POLICY FOR
USE OF FOUR WHEELED LIGHT
ELECTRICAL ELECTRIC VEHICLES
ELECTRIFICATION AND DOWNSIZING
OF CITY OWNED VEHICLES IMPROVE
AND EXPAND PARKING FACILITIES
FOR BIKES INCLUDING COVERED AND
LIGHTED PARKING AREAS.
POSSIBLE INCENTIVES FROM THE
CITY TO ENCOURAGE THE USE
OF CLEAN ENERGY VEHICLES BY
RESIDENTS AND THE BUSINESS
SECOND FROM LAST ADVOCATE TO
ENABLE LOCAL POWER GRID
INITIATIVES REQUIRED BY THE WAY
TO ZERO PLAN WHICH WOULD ALLOW
FOR CARBON FREE EV CHARGING I
THINK WE CAN REMOVE THAT ONE
RIGHT WITH THE AC YOU MOVING
FORWARD?
THAT'S RIGHT.
OR UNLESS THIS IS GETTING AT
SOMETHING ELSE I DON'T KNOW
KANYE.
IT MAKES ME THINK OF THE ACA
WHICH WAS APPROVED BY VOTERS
AND THE IS MOVING FORWARD WITH
BUT SOMEBODY ELSE HAS A
DIFFERENT UNDERSTANDING WHAT
THIS THE INTENT HERE
X1 IS
IMPROVE WINNER SIDEWALK
MAINTENANCE TO ENSURE
WALKABILITY AND APPLICABILITY
AND ACCESSIBILITY YEAR ROUND
WAS FOR THIS HIGH PEDESTRIAN
ACTIVITY AREAS IN RESIDENTIAL
AREAS AND THOSE NEEDED TO
ACCESS BUS STOPS
.
ERIC.
YEAH I JUST KIND OF THINKING
DOVETAILING WITH THAT LAST
BULLET POINT I DIDN'T REALLY
SEE ANYTHING IN THE DOCUMENT
ABOUT CONTINUING TO ADVOCATE OR
CLOSING SIDEWALK GAPS.
IT'S DEFINITELY SOMETHING
THAT'S BEEN COMING UP OVER THE
LAST FEW MONTHS I FEEL LIKE SO
I WOULD MAYBE PUT SOMETHING
LIKE ADVOCATE TO CONTINUE
CLOSING SIDEWALK GAPS WITH AN
EMPHASIS ON MAYBE ROUTES USED
TO LIKE SAFE ROUTES TO SCHOOL
OR YOU KNOW, WITH THE MIND TO
IMPROVE PEDESTRIAN SAFETY
BECAUSE WE DEFINITELY ARE STILL
EVEN THOUGH WE HAVE THE
SIDEWALK KNOWLEDGE, WE'RE STILL
IN A CONSTANT CONVERSATION
ABOUT SIDEWALKS AND MAKING SURE
THAT KIDS DO HAVE THEM BECAUSE
THERE'S A LOT OF GAPS IN THE
CITY.
THANK YOU.
I'M I'M GOOD WITH THAT BEING
THERE ANYTHING ELSE I KNOW THAT
WAS IT.
I RACHEL OH YEAH.
>> IT WAS JUST I AM GLAD YOU
MENTIONED THAT ERIC AND I WOULD
JUST ADVOCATE FOR US TO MOVE
THOSE LAST TWO BULLET POINTS
FURTHER UP.
I THINK THAT IT'S A SMALL THING
MAKING SURE THAT YOU KNOW, AS
WE THINK ABOUT VULNERABILITY
OF OF USERS THAT ARE THAT USERS
WITH A HIGHER LEVEL
OF VULNERABILITY KIND
OF PRIORITIZED IN THE LIST.
SO THAT WOULD BE ONE THING TO
CONSIDER.
THE OTHER THING I DON'T SEE ON
HERE AND I DON'T KNOW IF THIS
HAS BEEN A DISCUSSION AMONG THE
COMMISSION BUT ANYTHING ABOUT
MICRO MOBILITY AND JUST LIKE
BUILDING OUT THE POLICY THE
LOCAL POLICY LANDSCAPE TO
ENSURE SAFE AND ACCESSIBLE LIKE
MOSTLY I THINK THAT MICRO
MOBILITY USERS ARE SAFE WITH
SCOOTERS AND THINGS LIKE THAT.
BUT YEAH, I THINK WE HAVE THERE
IS A SUBCOMMITTEE WHAT LIKE
THREE OR FOUR YEARS AGO I DON'T
KNOW IF YOU REMEMBER LOOK AT A
STEVE TRUST THIS YOU KNOW THAT
WHAT WE MAKE SURE THAT AND
MAYBE IT'S IT COULD AN AGENDA
TOPIC JUST TO HAVE A REFRESHER
ON WHAT THE POLICY IS BECAUSE
IT WAS A NUMBER OF YEARS AGO
BUT IS THERE ANYTHING THAT
COUNCIL SHOULD ACT ON THAT IN
THAT POLICY I GUESS IS A GOOD
QUESTION.
THE POLICY I'M SURE AS YOU
KNOW, MEMORY SERVES AS
RECOMMENDATIONS AND SOME
GUIDELINES BUT MAYBE WE NEED TO
REVIEW TO SEE IF THERE'S
ANYTHING THAT NEEDS TO GO
THROUGH COUNCIL MORE FORMALLY
THAT MAKES SENSE.
>> I KNOW THAT THE SPIN SCOOTER
IS ALMOST LIKE ON A MONTH A
MONTH RIGHT NOW BECAUSE THEY
HAD SOME KIND OF LIKE A YEAR
LONG CONTRACT THAT WAS NOT
RENEWED AND NOW THEY'VE BEEN
DOING IT LIKE A THREE MONTH
CONTRACT OR SOMETHING WITH CITY
COUNCIL.
SO I'M NOT SURE IF THAT'S
SOMETHING WE NEED TO ADVOCATE
FOR OR IF ANYBODY HAS STRONG
OPINIONS ON SPIN SCOOTERS.
I CERTAINLY DON'T.
BUT
THAT BARWISE RIGHT NOW
THREE THE ATTORNEY'S OFFICE IS
WORKING ON ANOTHER I GUESS A
MONTH OR THREE MONTH RENEWAL
AND THE GOAL IS TO ESTABLISH A
YEAR LONG AND MAYBE A LONGER
TERM CONTRACT AFTER THIS NEXT
RENEWAL.
>> I CAN SPEAK VERY QUICKLY.
THE CONTRACT IS CURRENTLY BEING
RUN AT OR FIVE NO EXECUTION
PENDING SIGNATURES FROM CITY
MANAGEMENT.
SO I DON'T THINK WE NEED TO PUT
ANYTHING ABOUT THE CONTRACT IN
HERE BUT THE MICRO MOBILITY
USER SAFETY I THINK THAT THE IF
WE CAN JUST REVISIT WHAT WE
PASSED A FEW YEARS AGO BUT I
REMEMBER IT BEING VERY
COMPREHENSIVE AND THE SUBJECT
OF A LOT OF THOUGHT.
>> ALL RIGHT.
SO I DO HAVE STRONG OPINIONS
ABOUT THE CONTRACT AND RACHEL,
I'M GLAD YOU BROUGHT IT UP AND
I THINK IT'S WORTH ADDING TO
THIS DOCUMENT THAT WE WANT TO
PURSUE PARTNER MICRO MOBILITY
PARTNERSHIPS WITH WITH PARTNERS
WHO ARE PRIORITIZING SAFETY AND
I'M NOT EXACTLY SURE HOW TO SAY
THAT BUT BUT I WILL ALSO COME
RIGHT OUT AND SAY AS I HAVE HAD
AS I HAVE ON OTHER OCCASIONS
THAT SPIN IS NOT PRIORITIZING
SAFETY AND THEY HAVE A BUSINESS
MODEL.
I THINK THAT IS THAT ENCOURAGES
PEOPLE TO DO UNSAFE THINGS.
SO THEY ARE NOT THEY ARE NOT
LISTENING TO US ABOUT THINGS
THAT THEY COULD DO TO MAKE
THEIR OPERATIONS SAFER AND I
THINK IT'S WORTH PUTTING THAT
IN THIS DOCUMENT THAT THAT'S
SOMETHING THAT WE WANT
ERIC
UNGOOD CERTAINLY ISN'T THE LAST
OPPORTUNITY TO GET ANYTHING
INTO INTO THIS DOCUMENT.
AGAIN, LIKE I SAID, PLEASE
EMAIL US CHRISTOPHER LUGG
MYSELF AND KATE WITH ANY OTHER
COMMENTS.
YOU KNOW, AS YOU THINK
OF THINGS OVER THE NEXT FEW
WEEKS AND WE'LL HAVE HOPEFULLY
SOMETHING TO VOTE ON NEXT MONTH
DOESN'T BUT THANK YOU.
I LOOK I THINK YOU'RE STILL UP
IN TERMS OF SHARING YOUR SCREEN
FOR THE STAFF REPORT PORTION.
YOU OK?
THIS IS A DOCUMENT IN A PACKET
IN THE FIRST GROUP FOR
TRANSITION PLANNING STUDIES AND
INITIATIVES OR YOU TALK ABOUT
THE STREET THE RECONFIGURATION
PROJECT STATEMENT
JURISDICTIONAL TRANSFER SIM'S
DEVASTATOR AS LAST MONTH MINOR
MOVEMENT I'M THAT IS LOOKING TO
SET UP REGULAR MEETINGS WITH
CITY STAFF.
SO THAT'S THE ONLY UPDATE WE
ALREADY COVERED THE MICRO
MOBILITY, THE COURSE OF THE
STATUS ON THE CONTRACT
EXTENSION
.
NEXT ONE IS ROSICKY AUDIT
AROUND THE BLOCK DEFINED BY THE
THREE STREETS HERE AS ST.
CATHERINE GLENNON'S PICTURE.
SO THIS IS A GRAND AWARD BY
SIMCOCK TO CONDUCT ROAD SAFETY
AUDIT AND STAFF IS ROUTING THIS
CONTRACT FOR SIGNATURE COURSE
YOU CAN UPDATE ME IF YOU
ALREADY RECEIVED THE SIGNATURE
THOUGH.
OK, SPAETH MANAGEMENT PROGRAM
THAT'S THE DRAFT DOCUMENT WE
HAD THE FIRST MEETING WITH THE
THIS COMMISSIONS COMMITTEE ON
TRAFFIC CALMING AND WE ARE
SETTING UP REGULAR MEETINGS,
WORKING MEETINGS WITH THE
COMMITTEE AND THE FIRST ONE
WILL START NEAR THE END THE END
OF THIS MONTH
.
THE NEXT GROUP IS PROJECTS THAT
ARE BEING DESIGNED RIGHT NOW.
FIRST ONE IS SIDEWALK PROJECTS
THE THE WORK FOR PARKING DRIVE
.
THIS PROJECT HAS BEEN POSTPONED
FOR THE TIME BEING AND THE
REASON IS THAT THERE'S
INSUFFICIENT THE PUBLIC RIGHT
AWAY ALONG THE NORTH SIDE
OF PARK AND DRIVE.
THEN WE HEARD COMMENTS ON IN
SUPPORT OF FILLING IN THE
SOMEWHAT GAP ALONG BROCKMANN
AND THE CROSLAND, THE OTHER TWO
ON THE LIST ONE IS IN THE APPLE
PAIR AREA.
THE NEXT THE NEXT ONE IS ALONG
THAXTON AVENUE FROM MAYPO TO
IRONWOOD NEXT PROJECT IN DESIGN
IS SAFE STREET FOR ALL.
THIS IS THE PORTION OF THE
GRANT THAT COVERS SPEED
MANAGEMENT TREATMENT AND QUICK
BUILD OF BICYCLE LANES IN
ADDITION TO WAS SHOWN HERE
THERE ARE SOME LATEST
DEVELOPMENT THIS ONE STAFF HAS
SUBMITTED ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW
TO A FEDERAL HIGHWAY WHICH IS
NOW REQUIRING THE FINAL
CLEARANCE FROM THE DC FEDERAL
HIGHWAY.
SO THERE IS A DELAY IN THAT SO
IT'S VERY LIKELY THAT THIS
PORTION OF A SAFE STATE FOR ALL
GRANT WILL WILL BE PAUSED FOR
AT THIS MOMENT UNTIL WE RECEIVE
THE THE CLEARANCE ON THE
APPROVAL AND THEN WE CAN
RESTART THIS EFFORT SO IF THAT
IS THE CASE, THE POLICY WILL
START AROUND THE END OF THIS
MONTH.
I'M THE TRAFFIC SIGNAL
MODERNIZATION ALONG HERE ON IN
THE WASHINGTON OUT FROM STATE
TO PALMER THIS ONE STOP HAD A
DESIGN KICK OFF AND THE
CONSTRUCTION IS TWENTY TWENTY
SEVEN TO ALREADY TWENTY TWENTY
EIGHT.
I SEE THERE IS A QUESTION ERIC
PLEASE.
>> YEAH I JUST NOTICED THAT
THERE WASN'T REALLY AN UPDATE
ON THE QUIET ZONE FOR THE
RAILWAY THIS MONTH AND I WAS
WONDERING IF THERE WAS ANY
CHANGES ALL AND CORRECT NOT ON
THIS.
I CAN QUICKLY TOUCH UPON THAT
THAT ONE THE UNIVERSITY AND THE
CONSULTANTS OUR STAFF IS
FINALIZING THE STUDY REPORT AND
SO THE THE FINAL REPORT IS
BEING PREPARED TO PROVIDE THE
UNDERSTANDING BOTH IN REGARD TO
MINIMUM MINIMUM MONTHLY
REQUIRED IMPROVEMENT AND WHAT
IS ALSO CRITICAL TO THE SAFETY
OF ACTIVE MODES BECAUSE THE THE
QUITE ZONE PROCESS THE
REQUIREMENT DOES NOT HAVE
ANYTHING FOR PEOPLE ON BIKE OR
FOOT.
SO THAT IS SOMETHING THAT'S
BEING WORKED ON AT THIS MOMENT
.
THE NEXT GROUP CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS TWENTY TWENTY FIVE
STREET RESURFACING.
WE TALKED ABOUT FIFTH AVENUE.
THERE ARE OTHER PROJECTS AND
CONSTRUCTION WILL START IN
APRIL SIDEWALK PROJECTS THREE
OF THEM INDEPENDENCE BOULEVARD,
SEQUOIA PARKWAY AND WHITEBOARDS
STREET K E MEDICAL CENTER DRIVE
BRIDGE CONSTRUCTION PROJECT.
CURRENT SCHEDULE OF THE
CONSTRUCTION IS GOING TO
CONTINUE THROUGH THE DAY
OF THIS YEAR.
MILLER AVENUE WE HAD DISCUSSION
SOME DISCUSSION ABOUT THAT
TODAY AND THE CONSTRUCTION IS
STARTING THIS WEEK OR NEXT
WEEK.
SO IT'S VERY SOON FISCAL YEAR
TWENTY FIVE CROSSWALK
IMPROVEMENT.
WE ARE PLANNING ON INSTALLING
FIVE CROSSWALKS THREE ALONG ST.
SCHOOL AND THE ONE BEEKS
OF NORTH FIFTH AND THE FIFTH
ONE AT SOUTH CHURTON.
>> SHAZAD AND CONSTRUCTION IS
ALSO GOING TO START ALONG
JACKSON ON HERE TO PROVIDE OR
MEET BLOCK CROSSINGS AT THIS
MOMENT STAFF IS LOOKING TO SOME
UTILITY CONFLICT, HAS SOME
OF THESE LOCATIONS AND PLANNING
TO START THE CONSTRUCTION AS
SOON AS THOSE CONFLICTS ARE
RESOLVED.
>> STATE STREET FROM WILLIAM TO
SALFORD UNIVERSITY THIS IS ONE
WE LOOKED AT ALTERNATIVE CROSS
SECTION LAST MEETING WHERE THE
MEETING BEFORE CONSTRUCTION
WILL OCCUR THIS YEAR.
OK, NIXON ROAD CONSTRUCTION
PHASE ONE OF THE CONSTRUCTION
BETWEEN GRANT PARKWAY AND THE
BELOIT IS SCHEDULED TO START IN
THE MAY OF THIS YEAR PAULINE
WATER AND THE RESURFACING THIS
PROJECT IS GOING TO START IN
APRIL PITTSFIELD, THE VILLAGE
IMPROVEMENT THIS ONE
CONSTRUCTION IS GOING TO START
IN APRIL OF THIS YEAR.
FIFTH AVENUE.
>> WE COVERED THAT EARLIER AND
MISCELLANEOUS ACTIVITIES
PROJECT.
WE HAD A LOT OF DISCUSSION AND
REVISED WORK REGARDING THE
HARDING WARNING FOR THE
INTERSECTION.
SO CONSTRUCTION IS ALSO GOING
TO HAPPEN THIS YEAR.
I DON'T HAVE THE EXACT MONTH AT
THIS POINT.
THE OTHER PORTION OF SAFES ROOT
FOR OUR GRANT IS THE NEAR MISS
ANIMATICS MEDICS AND THIS
PORTION OF THE WORK THE
ENVIRONMENTAL CLEARANCE WAS
ALREADY CLEARED LAST YEAR.
SO THIS WORK IS PROCEEDING
WITHOUT THE IMPACT STREETLIFE
IMPLEMENTATION SO FAR IN THIS
CALENDAR YEAR HE HAS REPORTED
THAT THEY FIXED 226
STREETLIGHTS FOR NEIGHBORHOOD
TRAFFIC CALMING CONSTRUCTION
AND EVALUATION AND THIS YEAR
WE'RE EXPECTING TO HAVE AT
LEAST A THREE CONSTRUCTION
PROJECTS BYRD, HENRY AND ARADA
THOSE ARE FOR SURE IN THIS YEAR
AND THE MACHON IS ALSO EXPECTED
TO BE IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AND
SAME AS WARDEN AND THESE TWO
FOR MARSHALL AND THE WARDEN
VERY LIKELY THEY WILL BE IN THE
CURRENT CALENDAR YEAR BUT THAT
WILL HAPPEN LATER IN THE IN THE
NEW FISCAL YEAR THAT STARTS IN
INDRAWATI RIGHT NOW A STAFF IS
WORKING ON THE EVALUATION FOR
THREE OR MORE PETITION'S KAMAHL
BRANDYWINE AND DOKI SO ONCE
THESE THREE EVALUATION PROJECTS
ARE COMPLETE, WE PLAN TO KICK
OFF OUR FIRST
SO ALL THE
PROJECTS THAT THEY SEE HERE ARE
THE SEQUENCE THAT STAFF WILL
PLAN ON CONSTRUCTING OR
EVALUATING.
>> WELL WE WANT TO TALK ABOUT
FLASHING YELLOW ARROW
CONVERSIONS TO CANCEL THE
FLASHING ARROW WHEN THERE IS
PEDESTRIAN CALLING THE SERVICE
THIS THIS MONTH WE DO NOT HAVE
UP TO DATE IN THIS CATEGORY.
WE ARE DOING BENCH TESTING FOR
THE FIRMWARE WHICH IS REQUIRED
FOR SOME OF THE REMAINING
INTERSECTIONS TO BE COMPLETE A
AND FOR THIS MONTH OUR
SUMMARY
FOR REPORTED PEDESTRIAN CRASH
WE HAVE A TOTAL OF FOUR OF THEM
IN IN FEBRUARY.
THERE IS ONE INJURY WE RECEIVED
THE COMMENT ON THAT EARLIER
THIS MEETING.
THERE'S ANOTHER ONE RESOLVED IN
BILA INJURY.
THERE'S ONE THAT'S PROBABLY
DAMAGED ONLY AND THERE IS A
FOURTH ONE WE DON'T HAVE
CONFIRMED INFORMATION ON THAT
AS TO REPORT ON THE BICYCLE
INVOLVED CRASHES.
WE DO NOT HAVE ANY IN FEBRUARY
.
SO THAT WRAPS UP NEWPORT.
THANK YOU.
>> ALL RIGHT.
NEXT SECTION IS ARE THE EHSAAN
REPORTS.
SO ANY COMMISSIONERS WHO SERVE
AS A LIAISON TO ANOTHER BODY OR
ORGANIZATION ARE INVITED TO
PROVIDE A BRIEF REPORT.
NOW THERE ARE ONLY ALL RIGHT SO
NO MOVE ON TO TALK TO
COMMISSION MEMBER
COMMUNICATIONS.
SO THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY TO DO
ALL COMMISSION MEMBERS TO
PROVIDE ANY REPORTS OR UPDATES
THEY HAVE ANYTHING THEY'D LIKE
TO ADDRESS AT THIS TIME.
>> ALL RIGHT.
CALL FOR AGENDA ITEMS.
THEY'RE GOING TO GO THROUGH
WHAT WE'RE WE CAN EXPECT TO SEE
IN THE NEXT MEETING OR TWO.
SO BE SO SO FAR AS PERMITTING
APPROVAL WITH THE CHAIR AND
VICE CHAIR OUR AGENDA SESSION
WE'RE THINKING ABOUT BRINGING
WINTER MAINTENANCE UPDATE TO
NEXT MONTH MEETING OTHER
POTENTIAL TOPICS MAYBE NEXT
MONTH, MAYBE IN THE FUTURE.
WE HAVE A CAPITAL PROJECT
UPDATE SO THAT'S GOING TO BRING
MORE DETAILS FOR NIXON ROAD
CONSTRUCTION AND THE DESIGN FOR
NORTH UNIVERSITY AVENUE.
WE ALSO CONSIDER ABOUT SPEED
MANAGEMENT PROGRAM UPDATE.
SO AFTER WE HAVE A COUPLE
MEETINGS WITH THE SUBCOMMITTEE
ON THAT TOPIC ONCE THE THE
DRAFT THE WORKING DRAFT IS IS
READY, WE'LL BRING THAT TO THE
TO THE COMMISSION MEETING TO
PROVIDE A REPORT ON THAT A
QUIET ZONE STUDY UPDATE SO IS
IFILL'S THIS ONE IS COMING
SOONER SO WE DON'T KNOW IF
WE'RE GOING TO BRING THAT ONE
IN THE MONTH OF APRIL BUT IT
SHOULDN'T BE TOO FAR AWAY TO
PROVIDE A DETAILED UPDATE ON
THAT.
SO THAT'S ALL I HAVE ON THE
LIST FOR NOW THEN OF COURSE AS
ALWAYS IF ANYONE HAS SOME IDEAS
FOR FUTURE AGENDA TOPICS, JUST
SEND US AN EMAIL.
ALL RIGHT.
THE NEXT MEETING WILL BE HELD
ON WEDNESDAY, APRIL SIX, THE
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE AT SEVEN
P.M. THAT WILL ALSO BE A
VIRTUAL MEETING AND IF THERE
ARE NO OBJECTIONS, WE'LL
ADJOURN OUR MARCH EIGHTEENTH
MEETING SEEING NO OBJECTIONS.
>> THIS MEETING IS ADJOURNED.
I'M GOING TO THANK YOUR